26 8 2016, India
Niti Aayog
There was a time when development was believed to depend on the quantity of capital and labour. Today we know that it depends as much on the quality of institutions and ideas. Early last year, a new institution was created, namely, the National Institution for Transforming India or NITI. NITI was created as an evidence based think tank to guide India’s transformation.
One of NITI’s functions is:
- to mainstream external ideas into Government policies, through collaboration with national and international experts;
- to be the Government’s link to the outside world, outside experts and practitioners;
- to be the instrument through which ideas from outside are incorporated into policy-making.
The Government of India and the State Governments have a long administrative tradition. This tradition combines indigenous and external ideas from India’s past. This administrative tradition has served India well in many ways. Above all, it has preserved democracy and federalism, unity and integrity, in a country of glorious diversity. These are not small achievements. Yet, we now live in an age where change is constant and we are variables.
We must change for both external and internal reasons. Each country has its own experiences, its own resources and its own strengths. Thirty years ago, a country might have been able to look inward and find its own solutions. Today, countries are inter dependent and inter connected. No country can afford any longer to develop in isolation. Every country has to benchmark its activities to global standards, or else fall behind.
Change is also necessary for internal reasons. The younger generation in our own country is thinking and aspiring so differently, that government can no longer afford to remain rooted in the past. Even in families, the relationship between the young and old has changed. There was a time when elders in a family knew more than those who were younger. Today, with the spread of new technology, the situation is often reversed. This increases the challenge for government in communicating and in meeting rising expectations.
If India is to meet the challenge of change, mere incremental progress is not enough. A metamorphosis is needed.
That is why my vision for India is rapid transformation, not gradual evolution.
• The transformation of India cannot happen without a transformation of governance.
• A transformation of governance cannot happen without a transformation in mindset.
• A transformation in mindset cannot happen without transformative ideas.
We have to change laws, eliminate unnecessary procedures, speed up processes and adopt technology. We cannot march through the twenty first century with the administrative systems of the nineteenth century.
Fundamental changes in administrative mindsets usually occur through sudden shocks or crisis. India is fortunate to be a stable democratic polity. In the absence of such shocks, we have to make special efforts to force ourselves to make transformative changes. As individuals, we may absorb new ideas by reading books or articles. Books open the windows of our minds. However, unless we brainstorm collectively, ideas remain confined to individual minds. We often hear of new ideas and understand them. But we do not act upon them, because it is beyond our individual capacity. If we sit together, we will have the collective force to convert ideas into action. What we need is a collective opening of our minds, to let in new, global perspectives. To do this, we have to absorb new ideas collectively rather than individually. It requires a concerted effort.
As many of you know, ever since taking office, I have personally participated in structured brainstorming sessions with bankers, with police officers and with Secretaries to Government, among others. The ideas coming from those sessions are being incorporated into policy.
These efforts have been to tap ideas from inside. The next step is to bring in ideas from outside. Culturally, Indians have always been receptive to ideas from elsewhere. It is said in the Rigveda – “आ नो भद्राः क्रतवो यन्तु विश्वतः”, which means, let us welcome noble thoughts flowing in from all directions.
This is the purpose of the Transforming India Lecture Series. It is a series which we will attend, not as individuals but as part of a team who can collectively make change happen.
We will draw the best from the wisdom and knowledge of eminent persons, who changed, or influenced change in the lives of many, to make their nation a better place in the planet.
This lecture will be the first in a series. You have all been given a feedback form. I look forward to your detailed and frank feedback to help us improve this process. I request you to suggest names of experts and panelists from inside and outside India. I also request all Secretaries to Government to conduct a follow up discussion in a week’s time, with the participants from their Ministries. The purpose is to convert ideas that emerge in today’s session into specific action
points relevant to each group. Wherever possible, I request the Ministers also to participate in these sessions.
One of the greatest reformers and administrators of our time was Lee Kuan Yew, who transformed Singapore to what it is today. It is therefore fitting that we are inaugurating this series with Shri Tharman Shanmugaratnam, Deputy Prime Minister of Singapore. He is a prolific scholar and public policy maker. Apart from being Deputy Prime Minister, he is also the Coordinating Minister for Economic and Social Policies, Minister of Finance and Chairman of Monetary Authority of
Singapore. In the past, he has served as the Minister of Manpower, Second Minister of Finance and Minister of Education.
Shri Shanmugaratnam was born in Nineteen Fifty Seven and is of Sri Lankan Tamil ancestry. He earned his Bachelor’s degree in Economics at the London School of Economics. He has a Master’s degree in Economics from Cambridge University. He has another Master’s degree in Public Administration from Harvard University. At Harvard, he was honoured with the Littauer Fellow award for his outstanding performance.
Shri Shanmugaratnam is one of the world’s leading intellectuals. I would like to give you an example of the range and sweep of his ideas. Today, Singapore’s economy depends a lot on transshipment. But if global warming melts the polar ice caps, new navigation routes may open and possibly reduce Singapore’s relevance. I am told he has already started thinking about this possibility and planning for it.
Friends. The list of achievements and honours received by Shri Shanmugaratnam is long. But we are all eager to listen to him. Therefore, without further delay, it is with great pleasure that I welcome Shri Tharman Shanmugaratnam to this stage and request him to enlighten us on the subject of India in the Global Economy.
#DELIMITER#
8 7 2016, South Africa
South Africa backs India's bid to join Nuclear Suppliers Group
His Excellency President of the Republic of South Africa, Mr.Jacob Zuma,
Friends,
Thank you, Excellency, for your warm words of welcome and for your generous hospitality. Even though this is my first visit to this great country, my delegation and I already feel at home in this Rainbow Nation. For this, Excellency,we are deeply gratefulto you. For me personally, this visit is an opportunity to pay homage to two of the greatest human souls to have ever walked this Earth - Mahatma Gandhi and Nelson Mandela.
Friends,
Through centuries, India and South Africa have nurtured strong people to people ties.We stood together in our common fight against racial subjugation and colonialism.It was in South Africa that Gandhifound his true calling.He belongs as much to India as to South Africa.
Friends,
Our shared values, suffering and struggles provide a strong foundation to our strategic partnership. And,its success is visibleacross a range of sectors.In our discussions today, President Zuma and I reviewed the full spectrum of our engagement.We agreed that in the last two decades, our relationship has been a story of strong advances and concrete achievements. Two way trade has grownby over 300 percent in last ten years. Indian companies hold strong business interests in South
Africa. About one fourth of our investments in Africa are in this country.
And, there is potential to expand our business and investment ties further, especially in the areas of:
Minerals and mining;
chemicals and pharmaceuticals;
high-technology manufacturing; and
information and communication technology.
I am convinced that Industry to industry ties can not only bring rich economic gains to our societies.They can give a new shape to our partnership, and drive it to new levels.And, in the process, also help both our nations to play a more robust regional and global role.Later today, the President and I will sit down with the business leadership of the two countries to identify synergies in our engagement.
Friends,
The nature of our developing economies demands that our engagement should also focus on improving our human capital. Our capacities and needs in the fields of vocational, technical and professional education complement each other, and can benefit both our people. India is also ready to share it's expertise and capacities for the development of small and medium business in South Africa. Beyond economic ties, and links of business, trade and investment, we can also partner in the
field of defence and security. Both, at the level of industry and for our strategic and security needs. In India, this is one of the sectors witnessing a complete transformation. It offers exciting opportunities in defence trade. Our companies can also pool their capacities to jointly develop or manufacture defence equipments and platforms. And, not just to meet our defence needs, but also to respond to regional and global demand.
Friends,
President Zuma and I also agreed on the need to work more closely on international issues and emerging global challenges. I thanked the President for South Africa's support to India's membership of the Nuclear Suppliers Group. We know that we can count on the active support of our friends, like South Africa. Climate change, and its impact on the world, is our shared concern. We agreed that a large scale effort and focus on renewable energy is needed to address this challenge. It was
with this in mind that India had led the efforts to form an International Solar Alliance at COP 21 in Paris. I believe that it can be the most effective platform for access to knowledge, technology and finance for promoting solar energy.I am thankful to President Zuma, for South Africa’s partnership in this Alliance, which already has the support of over 120 countries. Terrorism is another shared threat that puts at risk the safety and security of our people. It attacks the
very foundations of our society. The President and I agreed that our two nations need to stay vigilant and cooperate actively to combat terrorism, both in our region and in the world.
Friends,
The waters of the Indian Ocean are our common sea frontiers. And, the Indian Ocean Rim Association has emerged as a key platform of engagement for the maritime neighbours connected by the Indian Ocean. I welcome South Africa’s chairmanship of the organization for 2017-19. India and South Africa are also working together to shape priorities of international agenda through IBSA [India, Brazil and South Africa] and BRICS. I look forward to welcoming President Zuma in Goa for the
BRICS Summit later this year, in October.
Friends,
Let me say this in the end:
From the Satyagraha of Gandhi to the forgiveness of Madiba;
From ports of Gujarat to the shores of Durban;
United by our shared values and common struggles;
In the vast opportunities of our oceans and economies; and
through the spirit of Vasudaiva Kutumbakum and Ubuntu. 
Our relationship has been a story of resolve, determination, justice and the excellence of human endeavour.It is truly exceptional and unlike any other.
Thank you,
Thank you very much.
#DELIMITER#
7 7 2016, Mozambique
Banquet speech by Prime Minister during his visit to Mozambique
Your Excellency, President Filipe Nyusi
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Excellency, I am deeply touched by your kind words. Thank you also for your thoughts on the strength of the Mozambique-India relationship. I would like to thank you as well as the Government and the people of Mozambique for their warm welcome and generous hospitality.
Excellency, the relationship between our countries is not new. Thousands of Indian-origin people call Mozambique their home. I am told that most of the Siddi community that resides in parts of India is known to trace its ancestry to Mozambique. These communitiesare a living testimony to age old links that have connected our people, their ideas and traditions, and culture and commerce.
Excellency, both our countries suffered under the colonial rule. In the case of Mozambique, the struggle was much longer. Independent India was one of the leading advocates of Mozambican freedom from colonial rule. We were proud to see Mozambique join the ranks of free nations in 1975.
And, today, we applaud Mozambique as one of the fastest growing economies of the world in recent decades. Excellency, as two developing countries we face similar challenges. Our development and economic partnership, therefore, has been an essential part of our relationship.
Our trade and investment ties have particularly flourished in recent years.We want to build further on it.For this, India remains ready and committed to share its experiences, technology, capacity and concessional credit with Mozambique, in line with your priorities.
Last year marked the 40th anniversary of Mozambican independence and of establishment of our diplomatic ties. It also saw a level of interaction between our nations, never seen before. Its high point was your own State Visit to India in August 2015. Later, your Prime Minister honoured us with his presence during the third edition of the India-Africa Forum Summit. Excellency, I am aware that I am the first Indian Prime Minister to visit Mozambique in 34 years. This gap should never
have been so long. And, I am confident that it will not be so in future.
With these words, Excellencies, Ladies & Gentlemen, please join me in raising a toast:
to the health, happiness and well-being of His Excellency, President Filipe Jacinto Nyusi;
to lasting peace, progress and prosperity among the people of Mozambique; and
to strong bonds of friendship and cooperation between India and Mozambique.
#DELIMITER#
26 6 2016, India
Mann Ki Baat
My dear countrymen, my greetings (namaskar) to you all
Last year, we had to endure so many trials - the scorching heat of the summer, scarcity of water, drought conditions and so on. However, the past two weeks have been the harbinger of the welcome news of rainfall from different places, bringing in its wake a feeling of freshness. You too must have felt it. Going by the predictions of the scientists, this time there should be good rainfall, far and wide and throughout the rainy season. This news in itself charges us with a lot
of enthusiasm. I extend my greetings to all our farmer brethren hoping for a bountiful rainfall.
In our country, like the toiling farmers, our scientists are also achieving success on many fronts to take our country to new heights. I have believed it right from the beginning that the new generation should nurture the dream of becoming scientists, should have keen interest in Science, and our youngsters should step forward with the zeal to do something for the coming generations. I also want to share another bright news with you. Yesterday I had gone to Pune, on the occasion of
the anniversary of the Smart City Project. Over there I met those students of the Pune College of Engineering, who on their own have made a satellite, which was launched on 22nd June. I had called them to meet me, as I had a wish to see these young friends of mine, to interact with them and to experience firsthand the energy and enthusiasm within them. For the past many years, several students have made their contributions to this project. In a way, this academic satellite is a
living example of the soaring flight of courage and ambition of the young India. That has led these our students to make this satellite. The dreams behind this small satellite are big and lofty; they soar high into the sky; the efforts put in by them are very intense. On similar lines as achieved by these Pune students, the students of Satyabhama University of Chennai in Tamil Nadu also created their satellite; and their SathyabamaSAT has also been launched. We have been hearing these things
since childhood, and every child wishes deep inside his heart to touch the sky and grab a few stars. Keeping this in mind, in my opinion, these two satellites made by the students and launched by ISRO, are extremely important and most valuable. All these students deserve hearty congratulations. I also want to congratulate the people of the country that on 22nd June, our scientists at ISRO launched 20 satellites simultaneously into space, and in the process set a new record,
breaking their own previous records. And this is also a matter of joy that of the twenty satellites which were launched in India, 17 satellites were from other countries. Along with America, the satellites of many other countries were launched on Indian soil by Indian scientists and along with these, those two satellites made by our students also reached outer space. And it is also noteworthy that owing to its guarantee of success with lesser cost, ISRO has carved its special
place in the world. And for this very reason, many countries of the world are today looking towards India for the launching of their satellites.
My dear Countrymen, “Save the Girl Child, Educate the Girl Child” (Beti Bachao, Beti Padhao), has already become the Mann Ki Baat, the heartfelt wish of all the people of India. Still, some incidents infuse a new life into this slogan. This time in the results of 10th and 12th classes, our daughters have been doing wonderfully well, which is a matter of pride. And my dear countrymen, there is another significant event that all of us should take pride in. On 18th June, the Indian Air
Force for the very first time inducted its first batch of women fighter pilots. You get goose pimples just at the mention of ‘women fighter pilots’; we feel so proud that these three Flying Officer daughters of ours- Avni Chaturvedi, Bhawna Kanth and Mohana, have achieved this great feat. What these three daughters have accomplished is truly special. Flying Officer Avni is from Rewa in Madhya Pradesh, Flying Officer Bhawana is from Begusarai in Bihar and Flying Officer
Mohana is from Vadodara in Gujarat. You must have noticed that all these three daughters do not hail from metro cities of India. They do not even come from the capital cities of their respective states. Despite hailing from small cities and towns, they nurtured dreams as high as the sky, and they also made them come true. I extend my heartiest wishes to these three daughters Avni, Bhawana and Mohana as well as their parents.
My dear Countrymen, a few days ago on 21st June, the whole world organised grand shows in observance of the anniversary of the International Day for Yoga. As an Indian, when we witness the entire world coming together through Yoga, we realize that the entire world is getting linked with our past, present and future. We are forging a unique bond with the rest of the world. In India too, the International Yoga Day was celebrated at over 1 lakh places, with a lot of fervour and
enthusiasm in myriad forms and hues, and in an atmosphere of gaiety. I also got an opportunity to perform Yoga in Chandigarh amidst thousands of Yoga lovers. It was worth watching the zeal of the young and old alike. You must have seen that last week the Indian government issued a postage stamp on ‘Surya Namaskar’ on the occasion of International Yoga Day. This time, people all over the world, on Yoga Day, were witness to two special events. One was at New York City where
the United Nations Organisation -UNO Head Quarters building is located. A special projection depicting different postures of the various yoga asanas was organized on top of that building. And passersby kept taking pictures of these, and these pictures soon were being shared all over the world. Tell me, which Indian would not feel proud at such happenings? One more interesting thing happened. Technology is at work. Social media has created an identity of its own. And this time
Twitter carried out a light hearted pleasant experiment in Yoga with its ‘Yoga imaging’. As soon as we typed ‘hash tag yoga day’, we would immediately get a picture of a yoga image on our mobile. And this image too went viral all over the world. Yoga by itself means adding - getting connected. Yoga has the power to connect the entire world. But for that to happen, first all of us need to get connected to Yoga.
Swati Srivastava from Satna in Madhya Pradesh, called me up on telephone after the Yoga Day and left a message for all of you but it seems that it pertains more to me: -
Sound Byte: “I wish that my entire country should be healthy and all the poor people also should remain free from diseases. For this I want that among the many ads that are played on Doordarshan, there should be one ad on Yoga, how it is to be done, and what are its benefits?”
Swati ji, your suggestion is very good, but if you observe carefully you will notice that not just on Doordarshan, but these days in India and outside India too, the Indian T.V. channels and channels of other countries are pitching in with their contribution to propagate Yoga. They all are shown at different times, but if you watch carefully, all these things are being done to disseminate information about Yoga. And I have seen that there are some countries in the world which have T.V.
channels exclusively dedicated to Yoga 24 hours a day. And you probably know that, during the month of June, in view of the International Yoga Day, I used to share a video everyday of one particular asana of Yoga through Twitter and Face Book. If you go to the website of the Ministry of Ayush, you will see available there a 40-45 minutes very good video demonstrating one after another, different kinds of yog asanas for different parts of the body that you can do, people of all ages can do.
To you and through you to all the people interested in Yoga, I would like to exhort to get connected to it.
This time I have made an appeal. When we say that Yoga is a way to rid oneself of illnesses, then why don’t we bring together all the different schools of thought of Yoga, which have their own methods, their own priorities and their own experiences. But all of them share the same final goal. All the prevalent systems of Yoga, all the functioning Yoga institutions, all the different Yoga Gurus, I have urged all of them to run a successful campaign this entire year on how to defeat
Diabetes through Yoga. Can we control Diabetes through Yoga? Some people have been successful in that. Everyone has searched for a wayin this regard. And we know that there is no definite cure for Diabetes. One has to manage it with medicines. Diabetes is the master switch that triggers all other illnesses. It becomes an entrance for many other diseases. And so everyone is wary of Diabetes. A lot of people have worked in this direction. Some diabetic patients have also been able to control
it thorough their yogic practice. Why don’t we share our experiences with other people to impart a momentum to this endeavour and create a kind of atmosphere for it for an entire year? I urge you to use– “Hashtag Yoga Fights Diabetes” I repeat- “Hashtag Yoga Fights Diabetes”. Use this Twitter handle and share your experiences on social media. Or send them to me on NarendraModiApp. Let us see what the various experiences are. At least, give it a try. I invite you to share
your experiences on “Hashtag Yoga Fights Diabetes”.
My dear countrymen, sometimes my ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is ridiculed a lot and is criticized much also. However, this can only happen because all of us are committed to democracy. But today, as I speak to you on 26th June, and I want to especially say this to the new generation that this democracy that we take pride in, this democracy that has granted great power to us, every citizen has been empowered... but 26th June 1975 was also a day... the night of 25th June and the next morning, was
a dark hour for the democracy of India when Emergency was imposed in India. All the rights of the citizens were suspended. The country was turned into a prison. Lakhs of people along with Jai Prakash Narain, thousands of leaders, many organisations were put behind bars. Many books have been written on that dark period. Many discussions have been held on it. But today, as I talk to you all on 26th June, we should not forget that our strength lies in our democracy. Our strength lies in the
people’s power. Our strength lies in each and every citizen of our country. We have to carry forward this commitment and make it stronger. And it is this people’s power which has sustained democracy as its living embodiment. There might have been locks on newspaper houses, radio might have been speaking just one kind of language, still on the other hand, given the opportune moment, the citizens give an example of the power of Democracy. A great example of the democratic
strength of the common people was witnessed during Emergency. And we must keep reminding our country of its democratic strength from time to time. And our endeavour should be to make people aware of their power and to always have the tendency to further strengthen it by linking more and more people to it. I always stress that Democracy doesn’t merely mean that people vote for you and give you the contract to run this country for five years. Certainly Not! Voting is certainly an
important component but there are many other facets of democracy. And the biggest dimension is that of people’s participation, their attitude, their thinking. And the more the governments get connected with the people, the stronger they become. The chasm between the governments and the people leads to ruin. My endeavour has always been to ensure that the nation moves forward on the strength of people’s participation.
Recently, when my government completed two years of functioning, some young people of modern thinking suggested, “When you talk such big things about democracy, then why don’t you get your government rated by the people also.” In a way it had a tone of challenge as well as advice. But that stirred my mind. I raised this topic with some of my senior colleagues. Their first reaction was, “Oh no! Sir! What are you thinking of doing? These days technology has changed so much that if
people get together and form a group and if they decide to misuse technology, then who knows in which direction they might take forward this survey.” They thus expressed their concern. But I felt, “No, we should go ahead even if it is a risk. We should give it a try and see what happens. Now a lot of surveys are conducted after the elections, during the elections, at other times also over some issues, sometimes to gauge the popularity, but the sample size of these surveys is not very
big. However, my dear countrymen, I am happy to state that when I, through the medium of technology, using different languages, appealed to the masses to rate my government, a lot of people amongst you have expressed your opinion on ‘rate-my-government-MyGov. In.’ Lakhs of you displayed your interest in this but 3 lakh people devoted their time and put in serious effort for giving an answer to each and every question. I am grateful to these 3 lakh people that they displayed a lot of
self initiative in rating the government. I won’t discuss the results. Our media persons are sure to do that. But I can say for sure that it was a good experiment. And this was a matter of joy for me that people speaking all the languages of India, residing in every corner of the country, hailing from all types of background... all of them participated in it. And the biggest thing was... and this, of course, came as a surprise to me... that maximum number of people took part in this
exercise through the portal of the website of the Rural Employment Scheme which is being run by the government. Thus, my primary impression is that there has been a large and active participation of people connected to rural India and poverty issues. This I liked the most. So you have seen that while on 26th June some years ago the voice of the people was stifled, now is the time, when the people make their decisions, they judge whether the government is doing the right thing or not,
is performing well or poorly. This is the real power of democracy.
My dear countrymen, today I want to make a special appeal for one thing. There was a time when taxes were so pervasive, that it became a habit to avoid taxation. There was a time when there were many restrictions imposed on bringing foreign goods into the country which gave rise to a lot of smuggling. But gradually, times have changed. Now it is not very difficult for the taxpayer to get connected with the taxation system of the government. But even then, old habits die hard. One
generation still feels that it is best to keep away from the government. Today I want to impress upon you that we end up losing our peace of mind by trying to escape from rules and regulations. As a result, anybody can trouble and harass us. Why should we let this happen? Why don’t we, on our own, give the correct details of our income and property to the government, so that we can rid ourselves from the burden of hitherto undeclared assets? I appeal to the countrymen to do
this. To the people who have undisclosed income, the Government of India has given a chance to declare such income. The government has presented before the country a special facility to disclose undisclosed income by the 30th of September.
We can be free ourselves of various burdens just by paying a fine. I have also promised that for those who voluntarily declare to the government their assets and their undisclosed income, then the government will not conduct any kind of enquiry. Not once will it be asked as to from where all this wealth came and how it was acquired. And so, this is a good chance for you to become a part of a transparent system. At the same time, I want to tell the people of the country that please
consider this plan, which is up to 30th September as your last chance. In between, I had even told the Members of the Parliament that after 30th September if any citizen is put through any difficulty, the one who does not want to follow due rules of government, then it will not be possible to help them. I want to say this to the people of the country that we do not wish that after the 30th September anything should happen that will cause difficulties for you. And so I say that please avail
of this facility before this date and save yourselves from any possible trouble after the 30th of September.
My dear countrymen, I had to talk about this in Mann Ki Baat today because recently I held a two-day conclave with the Revenue Departments- all the officials of the Income Tax, Customs and Excise Departments. And I have told them in clear words that we should not perceive citizens as crooks. We should have trust and faith in the citizens. We should hold hands with them. If they want to follow rules, we should encourage them, and lovingly help them cross over. It is important to build
an atmosphere of trust. We shall have to bring about a change through our conduct. We shall have to reassure the taxpayer. I stressed this upon them and I noticed that they too realized that today when the nation is surging ahead, all of us must contribute to it. And when I was taking inputs from them in this conclave, I gathered information which I want to share with you as well. None of you will believe that in a country of 125 crore people, one and a half, only one and a half lakh
people exist, whose taxable income is more than 50 lakh rupees. Nobody will be able to swallow something like this. People having a taxable income of more than 50 lakh rupees can be seen in big cities in large numbers. Just looking at their bungalows worth 1 or 2 crores, one wonders how they can be in a tax bracket of less than 50 lakhs. This means that there is something wrong somewhere. We have to change this situation. And this has to change before 30th September. Before taking
any extreme steps, the government must give a chance to the people. And so my dear brothers and sisters, this is a golden chance for you to disclose your undisclosed income. And in another way, this is the way out to save yourself from any trouble that could arise after 30th September. I urge you to come forth in this task for the betterment of our country, for the upliftment of the poor. And I do not want that you should face any problems after 30th September.
My dear countrymen, the common man of this country is always looking for a chance to do something for the country. When I asked the people to give up their cooking gas subsidy, more than 1 crore families of this country voluntarily gave up their subsidy. And now I want to cite an example especially for those people who have undisclosed income. Yesterday when I went to Pune for the Smart City programme, over there I got the chance to meet Shri Chandrakant Damodar Kulkarni
and his family. I had called them especially to meet me. And what was the reason? Anyone who has ever evaded tax, my words may or may not inspire that person, but the example of Shri Chandrakant Kulkarni is sure to inspire him. Do you know what the reason is? Shri Chandrakant Kulkarni is an ordinary man who belongs to an average middle class family. He used to work for the government. Then he retired. He receives a pension of sixteen thousand rupees. And my dear countrymen, you will be
surprised to hear, and those who are in the habit of evading tax will get a shock to know that Chandrakant Kulkarni Ji, who gets a pension of only rupees sixteen thousand, some time back wrote a letter to me saying that out of his pension of 16,000, he voluntarily wants to donate Rs. 5000 per month for the Cleanliness Campaign. And not just this, he sent me 52 cheques, post dated, which bear a date for each forthcoming month. We certainly do not have any right to evade tax in this
country where there is one such government employee, who after retirement, out of a pension of mere sixteen thousand rupees, gives five thousand for the Cleanliness Campaign. No one could be a greater source of inspiration than Chandrakant Kulkarni. And for the people who are associated with the Cleanliness Campaign also, there could be no better inspiring example than Chandrakant Kulkarni. I called Chandrakantji face to face. I met him and his life has touched my heart. I express my
felicitations and admiration for the Kulkarni family, I congratulate them. And surely there must be countless people like them about whom I have no information. These are the very people... and this is the power and strength of the masses. A man with a pension of sixteen thousand rupees sends me cheques worth two lakhs, sixty thousand in advance, is this a small thing? Come, let us search deep down inside our hearts, and ponder over the fact that the government has given us an
opportunity to disclose our incomes. While thinking of Chandrkant Kulkarni, let us also follow him.
My dear countrymen, Santosh Negi from Pauri Garhwal in Uttarakhand, has called up to relate one of his experiences. He has given a message regarding water conservation. Friends, his experience can be of use to you as well: -
Sound Byte: “Drawing inspiration from you, in our school, before the onset of monsoon we dug 250 small trenches which were 4 feet deep, along the side of the playground, so that rainwater could be collected in these. This way the play ground remained unspoilt and there was no danger of children drowning in these... and we managed to save crores of litres of rainwater which fell on the playfield.”
Santoshji, I would like to thank you for sending me this message. Pauri Garhwal is a hilly area where you have done such splendid work. You deserve congratulations for that. The people of our country should certainly enjoy the rains but let us also be mindful that this is a holy gift from the Almighty. This is a limitless wealth. We should make every effort to conserve every single drop of water. How can we retain the rainwater of the villages there itself and similarly preserve
rainwater of cities therein. To recharge Mother Earth once again, how can we replenish water back to the earth? If there is water today, only then can there be a tomorrow. Water is the basis of all life. An atmosphere has certainly been created in the country. Lately, in all the states a lot of measures have been taken for water conservation. But now that we are going to have the bounty of rain water, we must see to it that it doesn’t just flow away. We are so concerned about saving
lives; we should be equally concerned about saving water.
My dear countrymen, you already know that number 1922 ...it must have become a part of your memory by now. ... 1-9-2-2 . This 1922 is one such number that if you give a missed call to it, you can listen to Mann Ki Baat in the language of your choice. By listening to Mann Ki Baat, at the time of your convenience, in the language of your choice, you too can make up your mind and resolve to contribute to the journey of the nation’s progress.
My namaskar once again to all my countrymen, Thank You.
#DELIMITER#
22 8 2016, Afghanistan
Afghanistan visit
H.E. President Mohammad Ashraf Ghani 
Foreign Minister Excellency Rabbani 
And my dear Afghan friends, sisters and brothers 
It is indeed a matter of great pleasure to be with you again. Afghanistan is India's immediate neighbor and, in our hearts and minds, Indians and Afghans have always been closest of friends. 
Today, we once again come together to celebrate yet another achievement of our friendship and, take another step in the fruitful journey of our cooperation.
Excellency Ghani,
Fewer things give greater joy than getting together with good friends to celebrate successful completion of joint initiatives. You and I have been fortunate to have done so on important occasions in the past months. 
In December last year, you and the Afghan people stood with me to inaugurate the Afghan Parliament. 
The inauguration signaled and showed our joint commitment to strengthening the foundations of modern Afghanistan. The India-Afghanistan-Iran transit corridor Agreement that we signed in May this year was another land mark in our partnership. 
It manifested our clear and common determination to build new pathways for Afghanistan's economic progress and prosperity and, a month later, in June this year, we joined hands and inaugurated the Afghanistan-India Friendship Dam. 
The Salma dam will revive and renew not just the economy and agriculture of the Herat region of Afghanistan.But will also build a strong and lasting pillar of support for Afghanistan's overall growth and development.
Excellency, 
Today's video inauguration of Stor palace is an entirely different, yet in many ways more fundamental, dimension of our engagement. I say this because it brings back to life a valuable landmark of Afghanistan's cultural heritage. 
The Stor palace has been the setting for many momentous historical events. To those who cannot see beyond shadows of violence in Afghanistan, the restored Stor palace is a reminder of the glory of Afghanistan's rich traditions. 
And for our Afghan brothers and sisters, it revives the beauty, the richness and splendor of lost memories of Afghan society. 
True to the foundations of our ties, it links the present of our friendship to the historical bonds of our linkages.I must commend all the artists, experts and consultants who worked day and night to accomplish this delicate task.
Friends, 
Afghanistan is a close friend. Our societies and people have had age old ties and links. 
It, therefore, saddens us to see that your proud nation continues to be challenged by externally sponsored instruments and entities of violence and terror. 
Let me assure the people of Afghanistan that in your quest: 
• to build a prosperous Afghanistan; and
• to bring peace, security and stability to your society; 
the 1.25 billion people of India will always be on your side. 
The pledge of our partnership and strength of our friendship with Afghanistan is unwavering . 
Today's event is a testimony to the resolve and range of our cooperative endeavours . 
We want each Afghan to flourish and your society to be benefited from fruits of economic growth. 
Whatever may be the odds, India will work with you for a bright future for all Afghans.
Excellency, 
In the end, I would like to take this opportunity to thank you and your Government for protecting Indian Embassy and Consulates and ensuring the safety and security of Indian experts working in Afghanistan. 
The sacrifices made by our Afghan brothers will not be forgotten. 
I once again thank you for your presence today. 
I look forward to seeing you in person soon. 
I also hope to have an opportunity to visit the renovated Stor palace someday. 
Thank you, Thank you very much.
#DELIMITER#
15 8 2016, India
Independence Day
My beloved countrymen,
on this auspicious occasion of our festival of freedom; I extend lots of greetings to the one hundred and twenty five crores fellow nationals and also to entire Indian diaspora spread all over the world, from this rampart of the Red Fort. This festival of our freedom, this 70 years of our Independence, is the festival for our resolution to take the nation to new heights with a new resolve and a new fervour and new energy. We are able to breathe in a free air as the result of the
sacrifices, renunciation and penance of our millions of great forefathers. We are also reminded of the youths who kissed the gallows. We also remember Mahatma Gandhi, Sardar Patel, Pandit Nehru and countless great persons, who fought ceaselessly for the freedom of our nation. It is the result of their struggles that we are now fortunate enough to breathe as a free citizen. India is a very ancient nation. We have a history of thousands of years and our cultural heritage is also
millennia old. Right from the Vedas to Vivekananda, from the Upanishads to the satellites, the Sudarshan Chakradhari Mohan to Charkhadhari Mohan, from the Bhim of Mahabharat to the Bhimrao; we have a long historical journey and heritage. Our land has seen many historical ups and downs and our generations have waged many struggles and observed penance to bequeath great values to the humanity. India's age is not just seventy years. But having won freedom after a period of subjugation;
we have made efforts to take the nation forward in this journey of seventy years. Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel united the nation. Now, it is the responsibility of all of us to take make this nation better. We all have to work ceaselessly for the realization of the dream of ' One India, Supreme India'. (Ek Bharat, Shreshtha Bharat).
Brothers and Sisters, We have not attained freedom for free of cost. Innumerable were the atrocities, but undeterred were our resolves also. Every Indian was a soldier in the battle for freedom. Each one of them dreamt of an independent India. May be every one of them was not fortunate enough to sacrifice, may be each of them was not fortunate enough to go to prison; but every Indian had a resolve and the leadership of Mahatma ji and also the inspiration of countless
revolutionaries who had sacrificed every thing. All these movements contributed to our attainment of Independence. But, now we have to convert this freedom into 'the real freedom'. Now, this is the resolve of the one hundred and twenty five crores of Indians. So, just as we did not attain our freedom without sacrifices; we would not be able to attain ' the real freedom' without renunciation, without human endeavour (Purusharth), without bravery, without dedication and discipline. So,
in order to take ahead this resolution of one hundred and twenty five crore Indians; all of us will have to move ahead with our specific responsibilities in a most committed manner. Be it a Panchayat or the Parliament, be it a village headman or the Prime minister; every one of us as well as every democratic institution will have to shoulder their responsibilities completely and perfectly. Only then we will be able to realize the dream of our the real freedom as soon as
possible.This is correct to say that our nation is beset with many problems now- a- days. But, we should never forget that if we have the problems, then we also have all the capacities to solve them. So, if we move ahead with all our capabilities, we will find the ways and mean to solve all these problems. So, brothers and Sisters, if we have lakhs of problems, then we also have one hundred and twenty five crore brains also which are all capable to solve these
problems. 
Dear Brothers & Sisters, there was a time when Government used to be surrounded by aspersions. But now time has changed. At present, no aspersions are being leveled on the Government. Rather, people have great expectations from it. When the Government is engulfed in expectations then it signifies hope and trust, which in turn generates those expectations. Expectations give pace towards good governance, invigorates and so the pledges are implemented ad continum. My
Brothers & Sisters, today when I am addressing you from the rampart of the Red Fort, it is,therefore, but natural that we should discuss the journey of good governance, the work done by the Government and work being done and should be done for the country. I can present before you a very detailed account of work done and also multiple issues regarding the performance of the Government. During the tenure of two years, the Government has taken innumerable initiatives and
multiple tasks have been done. If I start giving details about them, I am afraid I will have to talk about it for a week from this very rampart of the Red Fort. So instead of that temptation, I would like to draw your attention towards the work culture of the Government. Sometimes, it is easier to present the account of work done. But, it is not easy for a common man to comprehend, understand and identify the work culture without dwelling deep into the work culture. My Brothers &
Sisters, My Countrymen, I would not talk solely about the policy, but also the intention and decisions of the Government. 
Dear Brothers & Sisters, it is just not an issue of direction and outline, rather it is about holistic approach and a resolve for transformation. It is confluence of trinity of expectation of people, democracy and support of people. It is both wisdom and consent. It is also pace and realisation of progress. Therefore, My Countrymen, when I talk about the Good Governance, it does implies bringing in transformation in the life of common man of my country. Good governance means
that the government should be sensitive, responsive and dedicated to the common man. Then only good governance gets the emphasis. Responsibility and accountability should be at the root of it and it should draw its vital energy from there only for the government to be sensitive, dear Brothers and Sisters. We remember the days when there used to be a very long wait to go to any big hospital. People used to come to AIIMS, spend two three days and then only it would be decided what
diagnostic tests were to be done. Now we have been able to change this system. Registration is done online and the doctor’s appointment is also given online. The processes start on arrival of the patient at the appointed hour itself. Not only this but all his medical records are also available online. And we wish to develop it as a countywide culture in the field of medical treatment. Today this system has been put in place in 40 big hospitals of the country. Its basic premise
is that the government has to be sensitive. 
Dear Brothers and Sisters, the government should be accountable. If it be not so then the problems of the common man are kept pending for solutions. How does the change come? Now technology is there, but there was a time when the railway ticket in the railways, concerning the common man and the poor was available only two thousand tickets per minute. Those who might have seen it, would know how the buffering used to be there, nobody knew when the website would be operational
again, but today I have to say with satisfaction that now it is possible to have fifteen thousand tickets per minute.The government should be accountable, it should take steps according to the necessities and expectations of the people. There is a class across the country, particularly the middle class, higher middle class whom you see troubled more at the hands of the income tax officials rather than the police at times. I have to change the situation and I am trying and
I will certainly change it. 
There was a time when a common and honest citizen used to give two rupees extra as a measure of caution at the time of paying his income tax. He used to think that he might not be harassed, but once the money was deposited to the government exchequer, he had to run from pillar to post and seek recommendations for getting the refund. It took months together before the rightful money of the citizen was returned to him from the government exchequer. Today, we have made a system
of issuing online refund. Today, refunds are given in one, two say or three weeks. Those who are hearing me today on TV, they would also be realising that they had not given any application, yet they had got refund directly into their account. So, this responsibility and accountability are the results of these efforts. 
It is equally important to lay emphasis on the transparency for good governance. You know that a global relationship has already started to become a common thing in the society today. A middle class man wants to have his passport- there was a time when about 40 lakh, 50lakh applications were received for getting passport. Today, approximately 2 crore people apply for the passport. Brothers and Sisters, earlier 4-6 months were taken for scrutiny of applications if one did not
have recommendations. We changed that situation and today, I can say with pride that passports are issued to the citizens with all genuine details, in about one or two weeks and there is transparency no recommendation is required and there is no dilly-dallying. Today, I can say, we have issued 1.75 crores passports (in 2015-16 itself.) 
In Surajya there must be efficiency in governance and therefore, earlier, if a company had to set up a factory or desiring to do business in our country, applications were submitted. There was a task of registration only, one wanted to do something for the country, but almost 6 months passed in normal course. Brothers and Sisters, if efficiency is brought, then the same government, same rules, same officials have got geared up to perform the same task of company registration within 24
hours and they are virtually doing it. In the last July itself, they performed the task of more than 900 such registrations. 
Brothers and Sisters, good governance is also necessary for Surajya and the steps we have taken towards this good governance are that, as I had said last year from the Red Fort that we would exempt group 'C' and group 'D' posts from interviews, they might get job on the basis of merit. We have detected almost 9,000 posts for which thousands and lakhs of people need to be recruited. Now, there would not be any interview process for these 9,000 posts, my young men would not need to
spend any money for interviews. Recommendations would not be needed, roads for corruption and agents will be shut and this work has been implemented. 
Brothers and Sisters, there was a time when a common man got satisfied if the government announced any plan or merely announced that this would be done, he used to think that something concrete would happen now. Then, a time came when people asked for the plan unless the drawing of the plan came. Then, there was a time when people asked for the budget. Today, the mood of the country has changed in 70 years. It does not get satisfied with the announcement, it is not
satisfied by seeing the plan, if a budget provision is made, it is not ready to accept this. It is accepted when things get implemented on ground and we cannot bring things on ground with the old pace. We have to speed up our work, increase the pace further and then we can say that we have done something. 
Rural roads are a perpetual issue in our country. Each rural citizen craves for pakka roads. Its a huge task. Atal Behari Vajpayi Ji took this task specifically .Even succeding governments continued this and the work continued. We have made efforts to fast track it. Earlier 70-75 Km of rural roads were completed in a day. Now we have increased that pace up to 100Km a day. This pace will fulfil the aspirations of common man in the days to come. 
We have aid emphasis on energy, specifically renewable energy in our country. That was a time, when after so many years of independence, we started working on wind energy. Within a period of last one year we have increased it up to 40%.So this is the scale of up acceleration. Whole world is focussing on Solar energy. We have increased it approximately 116%-118%.This is not only a substantial incremental change, it’s a huge leap forward. We intend to enhance the things
in quantum way. 
In our country, even before forming of our government, we had the power production. But to reach the power, you need transmission lines and the good transmission infrastructure. Two years preceding the formation of our government,30-35 thousand kilometres of transmission lines were being laid annually. Today I wish to submit this with satisfaction that we have raised this to 50,000 Kilometres. So we have increased the pace here. If we take the commissioning of railway lines
in previous 10 years, where commissioning means capacity to ply the trains and to finish all the trials, so earlier it was at the rate of 1500 kilometre in 10 years . But we have made it up to 3500 kilometre in last 2 years. We are to increase this pace even further. 
Brothers and Sisters, Now we are connecting government schemes to Adhaar Card, focussing on stopping the leakages through direct benefit transfer. Previous government had connected four crore people to government schemes via Adhaar Card. Today I can say this with satisfaction that in place of that work of four crore, we have completed the task of connecting 70 crore people to government schemes via Adhaar card. The remaining will also be taken into the fold. 
Today, for middle class or for common people the ownership of a car is a matter of pride. There was a time when gas stove at home was deemed as a standard and as a symbol of social status. During the last 60 years of independence, 14 crore LPG gas connections were given. Brothers and Sisters, it is a great satisfaction to me that on one side, 14 crore gas connections were given in 60 years, while on the other side, we have given 4 crore gas connections in just 60 weeks.
Please compare the two figures - 14 crore in 60 years and 4 crore in 60 weeks. This is the speed, by which a change has become possible in the quality of life of common men. We have also started the task of eradicating obsolete laws. The burden of unnecessary laws has been creating hindrance in the functioning of the government, the judiciary and the public. We have identified 1700 such laws, out of which 1175 laws have already been repealed by the Parliament and several other
such laws are in the process of repealing. 
Brothers and Sisters, it had become a tendency among the people to say that certain work can be done and certain other work cannot be done, certain work cannot be done now and certain work cannot be done ever. A kind of negativity was prevalent in the minds of people. Now, a clear break through is visible in the mindset, a new synergy is seen in the functioning of the government. When an accomplishment is achieved, it stimulates dynamism, which sharpens our determination and then,
the end result is not far away. 
Brothers and Sisters, when we had launched "Prime Minister Jan-Dhan Yojana", it was almost an impossible task. There were banks and the governments, nationalisation had already taken place, but the common man of the country was not able to be a part of the mainstream of national economy. 
Brothers and Sisters, we have attained this impossible task through inclusion of 21 crore persons under "Jan-Dhan Yojana". This is not a matter of taking credit by the Government, it is really an achievement of 125 crore countrymen of the country, for which I salute them. The campaign for women pride in villages of the country is an important issue of today. The practice of open defecation should be stopped; toilets should be built in villages. When I had got the first opportunity
to address from the ramparts of the Red Fort, I had expressed my feelings about it. Now, I can claim that more than 2 crore toilets have already been built in villages of the country within such a short period. More than 70 thousand villages are now free from the practice of open defecation. We are working towards bringing change in the lives of common man.
I had earlier announced from the ramparts of the Red Fort that we would electrify those 18 thousand villages, which are still without electricity.We are going to complete 70 years of independence, but they had not seen electricity. They were forced to live in the 18th century. We undertook this task of making possible the impossible and today I am glad to say that, though we have not been able to complete even half the task within a thousand days, we are still away from the
half-mark, out of the 18 thousand, electricity has reached ten thousand villages. I have been told that there are many among those villages who are watching Independence Day celebrations for the first time today on television in their homes. Today, from here I extend special greetings to those villages.
Brothers and Sisters, you will be surprised to know that at merely three hours journey from Delhi, there is a village called Nagla Fatela in Hathras region. It takes only three hours to reach this Nagla Fatela. But it took 70 years for electricity to reach there. 70 years, my brothers and Sisters! And therefore, I am introducing you to the work culture that we are following.
Brothers and Sisters, the LED bulbs were developed by the science and the researchers for welfare of every citizen. But in India it used to cost 350 Rupees. Who would buy it? And even the government would think, “It’s alright. The work is done. Someone must be using it.” But this should not be the attitude. If LED bulbs can bring about a change in the life of a common man, if it can ameliorate the environment, if it can improve India’s economy, then the government must make efforts
in this direction. It is the nature of the government that it intervenes where it is not required and shies away from intervening where it is needed. We tried to change this situation, this work culture. And therefore, the bulb which used to be sold at 350 Rupees, it is now being sold at 50 Rupees because of governmental intervention. See the difference! 350 Rupees on one hand and 50 Rupees on the other. I do not want to ask where all this money used to go, however, thirteen crore
bulbs have been distributed till date.
The politics of our country has become populist; the economic policies have become populist. If three hundred Rupees subsidy for each bulb had been given from public exchequer, the Prime Minister would have been applauded for doling out five hundred crore to the people. But we have ensured that they save thousands of crores by providing bulbs at only fifty Rupees. We have already distributed thirteen crore bulbs and we have resolved to distribute 77 crores and I would like to appeal to
my countrymen to use LED bulbs in their homes and save 200, 300, 500 Rupees in a year and save energy and save our environment. The day we achieve the target of 77 crore bulbs, we would be saving 20 thousand Mega Watt of electricity. When we save 20000 Megawatt electricity, it means we save around 125000 crores rupees. Brothers and Sisters, you can save 125000 crore rupees of the country by using a LED bulb at your home. We can fight against global warming by saving 20000
Megawatt electricity and contribute a lot towards the efforts aimed at the protection of environment and a common man can also contribute to it. So, brothers and Sisters, we have worked in that direction-making the impossible possible.
You know that we depend on other countries of the world for energy and petroleum products and for that we have signed long term agreements with them so that we could get these products at fixed prices for a long period. We have entered into an agreement with Quatar for buying gas till 2024 but the prices are so high that it is costly for our economy. It was a result of our foreign policy relationship that we were able to renegotiate with Quatar, and the agreement which was the right
of Quatar, and we were bound to buy gas from it till 2024, we negotiated with them and today, I can say with satisfaction that we made an impossible task possible, they renegotiated their prices and it will save 2000 crore rupees of the exchequer of India. They were entitled to get these 20000 crore rupees but the nature of relationship that we have with them and our policies have made it possible. The negotiations have been going on during the tenure of all the Governments and efforts
were also made for Chabahar Port, which is an important link for connecting us with Central Asia, but today I feel satisfied to see an impossible task becoming possible. When Iran, Afganistan and India collectively march ahead in a planned way for the construction of Chabahar Port, an impossible task becomes possible.
My brothers and Sisters, one thing, I want to talk about and which concerns the common man is inflation. It is true that the inflation rate had crossed 10% mark during the tenure of previous government. Due to our sustained efforts we were able to keep it below 6 percent. Not only this, we have, recently, made an agreement with the Reserve Bank of India that the RBI should take steps to control the inflation at the level of 4 percent with allowance of plus minus 2. We should leave
behind the talks of balance between inflation and growth and work for moving ahead. But the country witnessed drought during last two years and the effect of drought are readily seen on the prices of vegetables and the outcomes of sluggishness of market have resulted in some problems. The decline in the production of pulses due to drought during last two years was also a cause of concern. But, Brothers and Sisters, if the inflation would have increased at the same pace as it had
previously increased, I don’t know how the poor of my country would have survived? We have tried our best to keep it under check, but still people have lot of expectations from this government and dear countrymen your expectations are natural and I will not leave no stone unturned in achieving them. Whatever best I can do, I shall do that and keep the price of poor man’s meal under check.
My dear Brothers and Sisters, country is going to celebrate the 350th anniversary of Guru Gobind Singhji. How can the country forget the saga of sacrifice which has been the tradition of Sikh Gurus? Today, when we are celebrating the 350th anniversary of Guru Gobind Singhji, I recall one best thought expressed by Guruji. Guru Gobind Singhji use to say, how can I consider those hands pure which have not done any service, hands which have not strengthened by labour and have not
developed any blisters by toiling hard? Guru Gobind Singhji use to say this. Today, when we are celebrating the 350th anniversary of Guru Gobind Singhji I remember our farmers. Whose hands are more pure than theirs? Whose hearts are more pious than their? Whose intentions can be more pure than theirs? I thanks our farmers that despite two years of drought, they consistently endeavored to fill our granaries, I greet them for this. Drought situation has changed and this time we are
witnessing good monsoon. Heavy rains have also created problems at some places. Government of India stood with those states and citizen who suffered due to heavy rains. Today, I specially want to thank our farmers, because, when we are facing shortage of pulses and our farmers have shifted to other crops, and rise in demand of pulses by common man, I have to say this with content that this time our farmers have increased the sowing by one and half times. I want to thank our farmers
because they have come forward to solve the problem of the crisis of pulses and find its solution. We have decided the MSP for pulses and declared a bonus on it. We have streamlined the process of purchase of pulses and promoting the farmers for cultivation of pulses. This will benefit us in a big way.
Brothers and Sisters, when I was talking about work culture, one thing was clear that I do not look at the issues in isolation but as a whole. Let us see it as integrated and just take agriculture under integrated things, we have developed such work culture with lot of hard work, the complete chain of which can produce a great result. First of all we focussed upon- the wellness of this soil, wellness of this land, soil health card, macro-nutrition, concern for micro-nutrition and made
the farmers understand that this is lacuna in your soil, these are the good qualities, your soil is good for this crop, this is not suitable for this crop and gradually the farmers started their planning according to this soil health card. The people, who have planned, tell me, sir our expenditure has been reduced up to 25 percent and 30 percent increase is being visible n our production. This number is less at present, but in future as soon as this may pass on, this concept will
gain momentum. The farmers have land and if they get water, then the farmer of my country has the power to produce gold out of the soil. The famer of my country has this power and that is why we have emphasized upon water-management, emphasized upon water-irrigation, emphasized upon water-conservation. We are emphasizing upon how every drop of water may be utilised by the farmer, how to increase the importance of water, and get per drop more crop, micro irrigation. More than 90
percent irrigation projects were lying incomplete and stalled. We have taken up the responsibility to complete those projects first of all and will work in the direction that lakh of hectares of land may get the benefit of irrigation. We have taken a big leap towards solar pump so that the input cost of the farmers may be lessened because nowadays the farmers require electricity also, they require water, they need electricity, and electricity costs dearer. On account of it, the
input cost of the farmer is going to be less, the recurring expenditure is going to be less and due to owning solar pump at home will result in owning electricity, owning the sun, owning the field, owing the barn and thus our farmer would be happy. We have succeeded in distributing 77 thousands solar pumps till now.
Brothers and Sisters, I would like to congratulate the scientists of our country. Good quality seeds are also required along with soil, water and solar pumps. The scientists of our country have developed more than 131 new farmable seeds compatible to the climate and nature of India, which have the capacity to enhance our per hectare production. The values they retain are also being increased. I heartly congratulate these scientists also. The farmers require urea as well as
fertilisers. There was time when black marketing was in practice to get the fertilisers, there was time when the police had to lathi-charge for fertilisers. There was time when the farmer used to watch his crop being damaged in the absence of fertilisers before his very eyes. Brothers and Sisters, the lack of fertilisers has become a matter of past, it has become history now. Today, we have succeeded in utmost production of fertiliser by overcoming the shortage of the
fertiliser.
Brothers and Sisters, because of this production, the fertilizers are now available to the farmers in time as per their needs. Similarly, We conceptualized “Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana”. It’s insurance cover includes maximum protection to farmer’s land and his agro-produce at a comparatively much lower premium, and that too with a guaranteed cover. We have constructed new warehouses to preserve 15 lakhs tons of food grains. Our country’s farmers will benefit only when we move
towards value addition, and for this We have laid special emphasis on food processing for the first time. We have encouraged cent percent Foreign Direct Investment which would augment agro-based industries, and Consequentially, my brothers and Sisters, I believe it would help me and our farmers realize our dream of doubling latter’s income by 2022. These efforts would make it possible and for realizing the same, We have taken steps one after another.
Brothers and Sisters, Our country has a fancy for a trend. And the Governments, with an aim to leave an impression, have done a lot, and to fill the bill in this country, People go for some populist things and empty the exchequer. Governments have a trend of establishing an identity. Brothers and Sisters, I have tried my best to stay away from this allurement, and While doing so, I have tried to do several things in every range with the mantra of Total transformation, Transformation
with transparency, Reform, Perform and Transform.
Brothers and Sisters, We are far more committed to build the image of Hindustan than that of our Government. Regardless of party’s identity, the Country’s identity holds primacy. For, If the Country moves on, it will yield dividends for the coming generations, for centuries, and exactly, for this reason, We have accorded primacy to the country’s identity and not to our party. Now a days, You must have observed the scope of our work in Railways. While we are talking about having
Bio-toilets in train, we also cherish the dream of Bullet train. While We talk about “Soil Health Card” for farmers, we also want to march ahead in the direction of satellite and space technology. While talking about “Stand-Up India”, we are also taking steps towards “Start-Up India”. We are laying emphasis on Substance than on Symbolism. We are stressing on integrated development than on isolated development. Leaving aside entitlement, we are focused and emphatic on Empowerment
because an empowering country, my brothers and Sisters, provides an identity to the Government through the prism of the newly declared schemes. But sometimes the old schemes just tumble down. Nevertheless, the Govts. is a continuity. If the earlier govts. have done some work; then it is in the national interest that the next Government rectifies their shortcomings and gives a go ahead to these schemes. The arrogance that this was the work of your Government and this is my
Govt; hence we would not do this work; is not in the fitness of the things in a democracy. This is why, with all humility, we have given similar importance to the schemes of the previous governments. This is the hallmark of our work culture as our nation is a continuous and a ceaseless system and we wish to retain that system. This is why, I have a project called Progress. Under this project, every month, I myself sit and review all the on going projects. You would be amazed
to know that almost 119 projects worth Rs. seven and a half lakh crores. started by various previous Govts. were lying pending. I got all of them going. I said, so much of money have been spent on them, so, all these projects should be completed. Now they are all on the way to completion. We created a project monitoring group. I asked them to look into all such projects and find out as to when were they started. I came to know that some of them were started 20 years ago, the
other were started somewhere between twenty five to thirty to fifteen years earlier. The people living in the areas of these projects know all. We identified such two hundred and seventy projects worth Rs. 10 Lakhs crores which were inaugurated by some earlier govts. and some crores of rupees were spent on all of them; but all that money was going down the drain. We started all such stuck up projects once again. Brothers and Sisters, such helding up and delaying of the schemes after
having spent crores of rupees on them is a criminal negligence and we have tried to tide over such things.
Brothers and Sisters, earlier railway projects took at least two years in getting sanctions. A train is passing from somewhere, road have also been made on the both side; a rail over bridge is to be constructed. But the approval took two years. We have speeded up the approval process and have been able to shorten the approval time to three or four months, or maximum to six months.
Brothers and Sisters, however fast we may work, whatsoever may be the number of the schemes started by us; the touchstone of good administration of any Government lies in the last man delivery or the benefits accrued to that person. So, this has to be taken care off. Brothers and Sisters, when policies are clear, intentions are clear; then the sentiments behind the decisions are also a class part and the decisions can be taken unhesitantly. So, due to the correct policies and the
correct intentions our Government is taking unhesitant decisions and giving emphasis on the last man delivery.
We have seen and if you also go through the newspapers of Uttar Pradesh, every year there were stories about the outstanding balance of Sugar Cane farmers. Every year, there was news that this is not being done by the sugar mill owners, that was not being done by the state Govt, that sugar cane farmers are in distress. Thousands of crores of the rupees was outstanding. So, we made schemes in this regard and tired to ensure the last man delivery and also ensured that the amount
should reach to the farmers. Brothers and Sisters, out of the total old outstanding balance of the thousands of crores of rupees, I would like to inform you with a lot of satisfaction that almost 99.5% has been settled. It has happened for the first time after many years. I can point out in solace that all the sugarcane which was procured and which came for marketing this time for that almost 95 per cent of farmers have got the price of sugarcane produced and I am sure and I
believe that the remaining 5 percent of farmers will also be paid in the coming days.
Brothers & Sisters, We have initiated a mission to provide LPG Connections to the poor families. We have launched a dynamic mission under "Ujjavala" scheme to get rid of smokes emanating from chulha for my poor mothers. A target has been laid down to provide gas connections to 5 crores poor families within 3 years. Efforts are in progress and we have already provided gas connections to around 50 lakhs and that also have been done merely within the last hundred days -
you can imagine - that it may be possible to achieve the said target even before three years. We intend to emphasis upon Last Mile Delivery in this mission.
Post has steadily become irrelevant due to onlining of our Post Offices, Information Technology, Whatsapp, messages, e-mail. Our country is known as the chains of Post Offices and we have revamped these post offices. Post Offices are linked with poor and marginalised people. Postman is the only representative of the Government who is linked with the feelings and affections of the common man. We have never safeguarded the interests of the Post Man who has always got the affections
of everyone and the postman always cares for common people. We have taken measures to convert our post office into a Payment Bank. By setting of these Payment Banks, a network of Banks will be set up across the villages in the country. Pepole will get the benefits of Jana-Dhana account. The funds of MANREGA for the common man is now being transferred into their respective accounts through 'AADHAR', the cases of corruption are decreasing. Everyone will be benefitted through the
mission of converting the Post Office into a Payment Bank.
Brothers & Sisters, PSUs in our country are merely set up for loss-making units or for turning into sick units slowly and steadily or for disinvestment. This has been the common practice in the past. We have strived to launch a new work-culture. Today, I can point out in satisfaction that we have succeeded to turn the operation of so called notorious Air India into an operational profit-making undertaking during the last year. It is a fact that which all the Telcom companies of
the world are profit-making units, the BSNL was turning into a heavy loss-making undertaking. We have succeeded in bringing BSNL to operational profit for the first time. Nobody believed that the Shipping Corporation of India could also rake in profit, now it is bringing profit. There was a time when it was apprehended that how would a power factory last for a week. Whether we would be able to get coal for them or not. It also used to be reported that power factories have been shut down
for want of coal. Now, we have sufficient stock of coal at the threshold of the power factories. It could be used for months by them. Dear Brothers & Sisters, we have achieved it.
	Often, you must have seen that there is huge talk of corruption in our country. I have observed it myself that how corruption has looked the poor people from the lowest strata of the society and how huge amount of money is being wasted. We have linked AADHAR Card and AADHAR Number with the Government Policies. Dear Brothers & Sisters, earlier there was a system under which funds used to be released from public exchequer for widow pension, scholarship, persons with
	disabilities and minorities and also we used to receive list of beneficiaries. We looked into it deeply and found that even unborn children are also listed in it and getting benefit out of such schemes. These middlemen used to siphon off billions of rupees from it and nobody even took notice of it. But under the AADHAR System, we have removed all these middlemen from the list of beneficiaries and directly transferred the amount to the beneficiaries and found that these are millions of
	such ghost beneficiaries who do not exist at all and used to receive billions of rupees from it. Now that has been checked. We saved lot of amount. We decided to find out the needy persons who were excluded from that list so that the amount of money saved from it should invariably be deposited into the accounts of those persons who want to fight for their rights. We have worked in that direction to deliver it to the last man delivery and we have made it to reach it to them.
All of us are aware of the Coal Scam. Today there is no accusation on the coal auction. No stigma is attached to it. The states which excavate coal in India, will continuously earn millions of rupees in the near future. There was a time when the auction of spectrum was surrounded by allegations. We auctioned it online and that has filled the coffers of the country, bringing about healthy competition and also fetching benefits for the nation.
Dear Brothers and Sisters, today the world is passing through an era of global economy. Every country today is inter-connected and inter-dependent. Economically, the whole world is somehow inter-connected in one way or other. However much we may progress in our country, we’ll have to keep the global economy, global arena in view; come up to the global standards, match it also to stay relevant, and contribute, and also lead the global economy when the time comes. Therefore, we’ll
have to be alert all the time. We’ll have to comply with the global standards to make ourselves up to date. Recently, you must have seen how the World Bank, I.M.F., World Economic Forum, credit rating agencies and such other agencies in the world have all appreciated the progress of India. The world is constantly watching these things due to the decisions taken one after another by India in respect of legal reforms, improvement in system and changes in approach. We have very
speedily improved our ranking in `ease of doing business’ ratings. In terms of foreign investment, with regard to foreign direct investment our country happens to be the most favourite destination in the world today. We have left behind even the big economies of the world in matters of growth rate and GDP.
Dear brothers and Sisters, do you know what an U.N. institute has estimated about India for the next two years ? They have estimated that in two years India will come up to the third spot in the economic sphere in place of its present level at number ten. Brothers and Sisters, logistic support, infrastructure, all these things are taken into account in global standards, comparisons are made with rich countries of the world. Brothers and Sisters, while making analysis regarding this
logistic support and infrastructure of India, the World Economic Forum has said that India has reached above 19 ranks as compared to earlier positions and India is moving up and marching ahead rapidly. Brothers and Sisters, the way we are marching ahead with a dynamic and predictable economy in our country and also in global reference- the recently passed GST law, is also an empowering step towards it and all those parties deserve appreciations for this.
Brothers and Sisters, I had talked about a campaign from the same place- "Beti Bachao-Beti Padhao". We do not do any work in piecemeal. We have an integrated approach and I still need the cooperation of the society in the initiatives which we have taken in "Beti Bachao-Beti Padhao". Every single parent need to be aware. We should honour the daughters, protect them and give them the benefit of government's schemes. We have covered millions of families under "Sukanya Samridhi Yojna" which
guarantees benefits for the daughters when she grows up. We given greatest importance to the insurance schemes in which women are benefitted. They are going to reap its benefits. We have "Indradhanush Tikakaran Yojna"-because if we ensure two things for our mothers and Sisters i.e. economic empowerment and empowerment against health problems and we educate them, you can take it as an assurance that if even a single woman is educated in the family, if she is strong physically and
independent economically, she has power to pull the poorest of the poor family out of poverty and therefore we are working with emphasis on empowerment of women, health of women, economic prosperity of women, physical empowerment of women in our fight against poverty.
Therefore, my brothers and Sisters, "Mudra Yojna"- I am happy that more than three and half crore families reaped the benefits of MudraYojna. In it, most of the people who reached to the door of banks were first timers. Even out of these almost 80 percent people were from SC/ST/OBC. Out of these too, 80 percent are women who took loans from banks, Mudra bank. This is to be considered that how will these womenfolk will contribute in economic development. Brothers and Sisters! last
week we decided that our mothers and Sisters who have become the participants in the growth story, need leave after child birth. Earlier that leave was shorter but now we have increased this to 26 weeks, enabling the new mother to take care of her infant. Our weavers and the people working in textile, who make yarn and yarn rolls, used to get Rs.100.We have increased that to Rs.190 so as to strengthen the hands of my yarn producing mothers and Sisters. Our mothers, Sisters and weavers
who are engaged in silk production will now receive Rs.50 more per meter of production. This has also been decided that this Rs.50 per meter will not go either to the trader or to the middleman or to the dealer. Instead this Rs.50 per meter will go via Adhaar directly to the account of the weaver who has produced it. This will empower the weavers. We have started schemes with this intention and effect is now visible.
My dear countrymen! When we visualize railway and post office then we are able to see the unity of India. More we increase the institutions connecting India, our setup will change and that will enforce the unity of the country. So in the same tune we have started a new market scheme for farmers with the name ‘E-NAM”. Today farmers can sell their produce online in any of the markets of the country. Now he is not constrained to compulsively sell his produce in the market which is 10
Kilometers from his field .Neither to sell at low prices which is not remunerative for his hard work. Now a uniform sort of market network is establishing throughout the country with ‘E- NAM’.GST is soon to result in uniform taxation system and a unitary arrangement thus achieved will unite India as well. You will be amazed to know that earlier a zone was to have surplus energy and there were no takers. Another zone used to be in dire need of electricity, had to remain in dark and
factories used to be shut. To effect a change in this scenario, we earned a great success with the ‘One nation, One grid, One price’ .Earlier it used to be Rs.10 per unit in summers but I went to Telangana few days back to find it to be one rupee ten paise per unit instead of that age old Rs. 10. This is the result of one-price system, which can connect the whole country.
A worker of our county has to change his place of work after every one or two years. But, his amount, deducted under EPF, is not transferred. You will be surprised to know that when I took the charge of the Government, Rs. 27,000 crore were lying under EPF, which belonged to the workers. Workers were not able to claim their amount, as they were ignorant of the relevant process. To solve this problem, we have issued a universal account number to each worker, which would enable
easy transfer of fund to his new place of work. Now, the worker would get his amount after retirement and it would no more be lying dormant in a government treasury.
We have strengthened various initiatives such as Bharat-Mala, Setu-Bharatam, and Bharat-Net etc. We are working towards connecting the whole country and towards economic development of the country through all these initiatives.
Brothers and Sisters, this year is important due to various reasons. The country is celebrating 1000th birth anniversary of Saint Sri Ramanuja Acharyaji. The country is celebrating 150th birth anniversary of Shrimad Rajchandra Ji, the Guru of Mahatma Gandhi. The country is celebrating 350th birth anniversary of Guru Gobind Singh ji. The country is also celebrating centenary birth celebrations of Pandit Deen Dayal Upadhyaya ji. While remembering Sri Ramanuja Acharya ji today,
I wish to underline his message to the country. He used to say that we should serve all the devotees of the Lord, irrespective of their caste and class. He had said that we should never humiliate anyone and should give respect to all, without any discrimination on the basis of age and caste. The issue that was given importance by Gandhi, Ambedkar, Ramanujacharya, Lord Buddha, our scriptures and by our all spiritual gurus too is the issue of 'our social unity'.
If the society disintegrates, the empire straggles, gets divided into the highs and the lows, the touchables and the untouchables, then brothers and Sisters, that society cannot sustain. There are social evils, centuries old social evils, but if the social evils have become chronic, they need a bit harsh and yet sensitive treatment. The lackadaisical attitude will not solve the social problems and this is the responsibility of 125 crore citizens. The government and the society
together will have to steer through the social conflicts. Brothers and Sisters, all of us will have to fight against the social evils. We all will have to rise above social evils in our own behavior. Each and every citizen will have to rise above them and then only we can build a strong India. Without empowering our society, we cannot make India strong. Mere economic progress does not guarantee a strong India, the guarantee of a strong India lies in a strong society. And a strong
society is built at the edifice of social justice. A strong society is built only on the edifice of social justice. Therefore, it is our duty to lay emphasis on social justice. Whether they be Dalits, the downtrodden, the exploited, the deprived, my Adivasi brothers, the rural population, the urban population, the literate or the illiterate, the small or the big- the 125 crore of our fellow countrymen constitute our family. We together have to take forward our country and we all
have to work in the same direction.
Brothers and Sisters, today the entire world acknowledges the fact that India is a country of youths. What cannot be achieved by a country through its youth power whose 65 percent population, about 800 Million people, is below the age of 35 years? Therefore, my brothers and Sisters, it is the need of the hour that the youth get opportunity and employment. Today we are heading towards the birth centenary of Pandit Deen Dayal Upadhyaya. Pandit Deen Dayal Upadhyaya spoke of welfare of
the last human being which was even the view of Mahatma Gandhi. Pandit Deen Dayal Upadhyaya believed in the philosophy of ‘Antyodaya’. Welfare of the poorest and the weakest was the central theme of the political philosophy of Pt. Deendayal Upadhyayji. He used to say that every youth should get education, every youth should be skilled and every youth should get the opportunity to realise his dreams. We have taken many initiatives to realise those dreams of Pt. Deendayalji and to
fulfil the hopes and aspirations of 800 million youths of the country. The way the road network in the country is expanding, the largest number of vehicles are being manufactured in the country, the country is becoming the largest exporter of softwares, more than 50 new mobile factories have been set up in the country, all these things have created opportunities for the youths. If two crore door toilets have been constructed, it has provided employment to someone, cement has been
procured from somewhere, iron has been purchased from some other person, and the wooden work has been got done from somewhere else. As the scope of work expands, the possibilities of employment generation also increase. Today, we have stressed in that direction.
Similarly, we are working on 'skill development' as a mission so that crores of youth could acquire skills. We have changed a law, though it seems very small, and this law is 'Model Shop and Establishment Act'. We have sent an advisory to states to give reasons why the big malls are allowed to open 365 days and upto 12 in the night but a small shopkeeper in the village has to shut his shop after sunset. Even a poor should get the opportunity to keep his shop open for 365 days. Why
should our Sisters not get the opportunity to work in night? We have made legal provisions so that our Sisters could go to work in night also. There should be arrangements for their safety and other requirements but they must get the opportunity to work. These are the things which increase employment. Brothers and Sisters, we are working in that direction and we are ready to do it.
Brothers and Sisters, this is the government, we are the persons who don't believe in delaying the things, we know how to fight not how to delay, so unless we deal with the problems head-on, it is not going to happen. Today when we are celebrating our freedom in the country, some one among the army jawans, who live and die for the country, would be ready for taking the bullets on the border, someone will be sitting in bunker and some other one would not be fortunate enough to
meet his sister on the occasion of Raksha Bandhan. How many jawans are working in armed forces? More than 33000 police personnel have got martyrdom since we got our independence. Why should we forget them and how can we? These are the people due to whom we can live a life of peace and happiness. The issue of “One Rank One Pension” was pending for many years. We do not keep the issues pending but we face them. We have fulfilled our promise of “One Rank One Pension” and have spread
happiness in the home of every Indian soldier. We did this work.
It was the feeling of our countrymen that the files pertaining to Netaji Subhash Babu should be declassified. Today, I bow my head and say that without caring for the result we have decided to declassify these files; a task which was impossible and kept pending since long. We invited Netaji’s family members and shown them the files and this process of declassifying will continue. I requested the other countries of the world to declassify the files held by them and hand them over to
India because Indians have full right to know about Subhash Babu and history of India. We have worked in that direction.
Bangladesh -- When partition of India took place, a boundary dispute existed since then. A boundary dispute prevailed since the formation of Bangladesh. Many decades passed. Brothers and Sisters, all parties have together solved the Indo-Bangladesh border dispute and we have amended the constitution also.
Brothers and Sisters, a middle class person wants to construct his own house, wants to buy a flat. Builders lobby shows him a beautifully printed booklet and the helpless soul falls prey to it. He is not having any technical knowledge, he pays the installments but he is not getting the promised house in time. A middle class makes one house in his whole life and in it he invests all his capital. Brothers and Sisters, we have put a check by passing the “Real Estate Bill”, so that a middle
class should not face any problem if he wishes to own a house. We have worked for this.
Brothers and Sisters, I have already said that this year is the 150th anniversary of Shrimad Rajchandra Ji, the guru of Mahatma Gandhi. When Gandhiji was staying at South Africa, then also he was having correspondence with Shrimad Rajchandra Ji. In one of his letter Shrimad Rajchandra Ji discussed violence and non-violence. In that letter Rajchandra Ji writes, when violence came in to existence from same time the principle of non-violence also born. The important thing in both is
that which we prefer or which is being used in the interest of mankind.
Brothers and Sisters, the discussion of violence and non-violence is very inherent in our country. Humanity is in our blood. We are the people of a great, colossal culture. This country is full of diversity, colours and beauty. This is such a bouquet of mother India wherein all type of fragrances, all type of colours and all type of dreams exist. Brothers and Sisters, the unity of diversity is our biggest strength. The mantra of unity is connected to our roots.
Brothers and Sisters, a country having more than hundred languages, hundreds of dialects, innumerable attires, innumerable life styles, despite that this country remained united- its main reason is our cultural heritage. We know how to respect, we know hospitality, we know how to assimilate, we have carried this great tradition and that is why there is no room for violence and atrocity in our country. If the democracy of India is to be strengthened, the dreams of India are to be
fulfilled then the path of violence would never bring success for us. Nowadays a game of killing the innocents is being played on the pretext of Maoism in forests, on the pretext of extremism at border, on the pretext of terrorism at hilly areas by carrying guns on shoulders. Forty years have passed, this mother soil has grown blood stained but the persons on the path of terrorism have not achieved anything. I would like to remind those youth that this country will never
tolerate violence nor would it ever put up with terrorism. Nor would it bow down to terrorism. It will never succumb to Maoism. But I exhort them and say that you still have time-return to the mainstream. Just think about your parents' dream; just reflect on the hopes and expectations of your parents; return back to the mainstream; live a happy and peaceful life, for, the path of violence never fetches benefit to anybody.
Brothers and sister, we talk about foreign policy. I don't want to go into details. We had invited the leaders of SAARC Countries on the day we took oath at the Centre. Our message was clear that we all, neighbouring countries, have a common problem, and that common challenge is poverty. Let us fight this poverty together, by fighting one-another, we are left shattered but if we fight this poverty, we will walk towards prosperity. So, I exhort all neighbouring countries to join
us in this fight against poverty. No freedom can be much bigger than the freedom of our citizens from poverty; freedom of our country's citizen from poverty. No liberation is more liberating than the freedom from poverty. Whenever a citizen from the neighbouring countries would get freedom from poverty, we will feel elated regardless of the fact whether the poor belongs to us or our neighbouring country.
 Brothers and Sisters, what kind of people are those who got drive from humanity and, what is the kind of those who reward terrorism? I want to place two pictures before this world, and I say to the world, I say to those who believe in humanity that just weigh out the attack, when terrorists brutally killed innocent children in a school at Peshawar. The attack take place in Peshawar, and was a terrorist incident. The innocent children became victim of the bloodbath; the temple of
learning had blood stream all around; innocent children were slaughtered. Hindustan, the Parliament had tears in it's eyes; Every Indian school was in tears; every child of India felt the trauma of the deaths of children in Peshawar. His tears had become unstoppable. Every child, who was killed in Peshawar in the terrorist attack, ached our heart too. This is the drive of our nurtured culture of humanity; this is our humanity, but if you look around, you will find a more to
glorify terrorists.
Where innocent people are killed in terrorist attack, and they celebrate, what type of terrorism inspired life it is, what type of these creations of the terrorism inspired governments are? The world will understand these two differences properly, this is sufficient for me. Today I want to specially honour and thank to some people from the ramparts of Red Fort. For the past few days the people of Baluchistan, the people of Gilgit, the people of Pakistan occupied Kashmir, the
way their citizens have heartily thanked me, the way they have acknowledged me, the goodwill they have shown towards me, the people settled far across, the land which I have not seen, the people I have not met ever, but people settled at far across acknowledge the Prime Minister of India, they honour him, so it is an honour of my 125 crores countrymen, it is respect of my 125 crores countrymen and that is why owing to the feeling of this honour, I want to heartily thank the
people of Baluchistan, the people of Gilgit, the people of Pakistan occupied Kashmir for having an expression of thankfulness.
Brothers and Sisters, today when we are celebrating the seventy years of Independence, then there is a big contribution of freedom soldiers for the country. When there is a contribution of these freedom soldiers, then the Government is deciding to increase 20 percent in the honouring amount being received, pension being received by the all these honourable freedom soldiers family members. The freedom fighters who earlier used to get 25000 rupees, will now get 30000 rupees. It is my
small effort to pay my respects to the sacrifice and oblation of our freedom fighters.
Brothers and Sisters, when we talk about the history of freedom struggle of our country, some persons are talked about a lot, some are excessively mentioned but the contribution made by the people living in jungles, the tribals, in the freedom struggle was unmatched. They used to live in jungles. We hear the name of Birsa Munda but perhaps there would be no tribal dominated district where the tribals would not have fought and given sacrifice since 1857 to the time we got freedom. They
proved through their sacrifice what is freedom, what is struggle against servitude. But our forthcoming generations are not much aware of this history. The government desires and plans that in the coming days, in the states where these freedom fighters, who were tribals, who lived in jungles, fought against britishers, who were not ready to succumb. The Government would work towards building permanent museums in various states dedicated to tribal brave freedom fighters, wherever
land would be available for the purpose, where their contributions and memoirs would be displayed, so that coming generations could be able to know about their sacrifices for the country.
Brothers and Sisters, in the midst of the debate on inflation, we are realising one fact that the entire economy of a poor household is affected if somebody falls ill. The wedding of their daughters gets stalled, the education of children gets stalled and sometimes even food is not available in the evening. Healthcare is getting costlier and that is why, I am announcing an important scheme from the ramparts of the Red Fort for the healthcare of BPL families. Government are
faking an important for such families. Under this scheme, in the coming days, if such poor families have to take medical facilities, the government will bear expenditure upto Rs.1 lakh per year, so that my poor brothers are not deprived of healthcare facilities and their dreams are not shattered.
My dear Brothers and Sisters, let us proceed forward with a new determination, new energy, new enthusiasm by getting inspiration from those great persons who scarified their lives for our freedom. We did not get an opportunity to die for the country but we have the opportunity to live for the country. We should dedicate our life to the nation. We should achieve something of substance for the nation. We should fulfill our responsibilities and also inspire others to accomplish
their responsibilities. We should stride forward for building of one society, one dream, one resolution, one direction and one destination. With this very pious feeling, I once again bow my head before the great personalities of the country, the soldiers who risk their lives for our security on water, land and air fields and also those 33 thousands martyrs who sacrificed their lives for us. So,I, hereby, dedicate myself to dream about the future of the country and call on all of you from
the rampart of the Red Fort to speak with your full might : Bharat Mata Ki Jay! Let the voice reach to every corner of the world.
Bharat Mata Ki Jay! Bharat Mata Ki Jay! Bharat Mata Ki Jay!
Vandematram! Vandematram! Vandematram !
Jay Hind! Jay Hind! Jay Hind!
Thanks you.
#DELIMITER#
12 8 2016, India
All party meeting on Jammu and Kashmir
It is very happy to see that all our colleagues have expressed one voice and one sentiment.
Today, when we talk of Jammu & Kashmir, we should talk about four parts of Jammu & Kashmir: Jammu, Kashmir Valley, Laddakh, and Pak-occupied Kashmir.
I am thankful to leaders of all political parties for the concerns they have expressed about the current situation in parts of Jammu & Kashmir. The rich traditions nurtured by our democracy for last six decades have been biggest strength of unity and integrity of our country. We may have some differences on some issues but when it comes to the integrity and sovereignty of the country, we all stand united.
Like every Indian, I have been deeply hurt by the recent incidents in Jammu & Kashmir. It is very sad to see that children are not able to study, apple produce is not able to reach to the mandis, shopkeepers are not getting their daily income and Government offices are not able to implement works of public interest. The poor are the most affected lot by this situation.
Our existence as the political worker is on account of the people. They are our strength, sources of our energy; In fact, people’s power is a vital part of our public life. Irrespective of whether a civilian or security force is injured or killed, the pain is felt by all of us.  My deep sympathies are with their families. We are committed to provide better healthcare services to the injured; we want to restore peace in the Valley at the earliest possible so that people can
lead their normal life, can earn their livelihoods, send their children to school and have a sound sleep at night.
We are committed for a permanent and peaceful solution to the issue of Jammu & Kashmir in accordance with the basic principles of our Constitution. We have an open mind and our doors are always open. We are committed to the welfare of every citizen of Jammu & Kashmir.  We have been following the path shown by Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee Ji to find a solution.
Jammu & Kashmir is often said as crown of India. In fact, Jammu & Kashmir is a symbol of age old commitment of equanimity towards all sects, where Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists and Muslims have been living together for centuries. The state of Jammu & Kashmir is the symbol of our founding fathers’ faith which defines us as one Indian in spite of our diversity. Jammu & Kashmir is not only a matter of our territorial integrity but also defines our nationality. We cannot deny the fact that
the security forces have suffered all kinds of injuries and have been attacked in planned manner.  In spite of all this, our security forces have shown restraint.  The figures show that security personnel have been injured in large numbers.
Even after misleading propaganda by certain elements in Kashmir, the percentage of those spreading confusion & unrest; and those instigating youth is very low in Kashmir.  Every Kashmiri wants peace, has faith in Democracy. That’s why even after intimidations by separatists’ elements during every election-which are like festivals of democracy; the Kashmiri public has expressed its faith in Indian Democratic System. Even just before the recent disturbances, high
voting was casts in the constituency of CM Mehbooba Ji.  Therefore, it is far from being true to call it a public movement.
In some areas certain prohibitions were imposed in order to maintain law and order. This is a legal way of maintaining law and order. Otherwise the lives of peace loving people will be affected adversely. In reality, a common man was not troubled as much by such prohibitions, as he was troubled by continuous strikes declared by separatists’ elements.
During this period, the Amarnath pilgrimage was going on nicely. In addition, the State Government continued to do special work on solar energy in Laddakh region.  NEET, CET, UPSC Civil Services Exams were organised as per schedule. Even all essential commodities were provided to citizens. The up-coming period is perfect for tourism.  Besides, the Apple crop is about to arrive, which is of paramount importance for the livelihood of a common Kashmiri. Certain separatist elements
taking advantage of this time want to disturb the peaceful environment and peace-loving citizens of Kashmir.
The fundamental reason of disturbances in Kashmir Valley is cross-border terrorism promoted by our neighboring country. Due to terrorism normal life in Kashmir Valley is affected.  Since the start of Terrorist activities in Kashmir in 1989-1990, the Security Forces have achieved following:    
More than 34,000 AK 47 Riffles were seized.
More than 5000 Grenade launchers were seized.
Around 90 LMGs were seized.
More then 12,000 Revolvers were seized.
3 Anti Tank Guns and 4 Anti Air Craft Guns were seized.
More than 350 Missile Launchers were seized.
63,000 kilograms of explosives including RDX and more than one lakh Grenades were seized.
During this period more than 5,000 foreign terrorists were killed which is almost equal to the strength of 5 Battalions.
 
  When weapons have been seized in such huge numbers, so many foreign terrorists have infiltrated to eliminate people, therefore the world will never accept the false propaganda and lakhs of lies of Pakistan.
   Pakistan forgets that it bombs its own Citizens by Fighter Planes in its own land. Now the time has come that Pakistan shall have to answer to the world for the atrocities committed by it against the people in Baluchistan and PoK.
   We are fully committed to the fundamental rights of the people. Even our laws against terrorism are more humane, than any other democracy of the world. Our governments and our security forces have shown restraint in dealing with these incidents.
   India will fight against terrorism with her full might and resolve. It is our national duty. To consider India’s commitment to the Rule of Law, as a weakness, will be a mistake by the opponents. India is determined to route out terrorism. For us ‘means and ends’ are both important and we are capable to adhere to them.
   It is also a reality that Kashmiri Pandits have been displaced from Kashmir Valley who have been living there for centuries in their ancestral home.  This kind of atrocity against a particular community is the misdeed of terrorists trained and armed with weapons by Pakistan and their sympathizers, but definitely not the deeds of those who believe in Kashmiriat.
   For the all round development of Jammu and Kashmir, a decision has been taken for a development package of more than Rs.80 thousand crore in consultation with the State Government. Under this package not only roads and electricity projects have been included but also development of every region and every section of society of Jammu and Kashmir has been kept in mind. This includes better facility for education of children, employment to youths, modern facility for treatment,
 facilities for promotion of tourism in the state and special facility for production of fruits in the State.
  In order to provide employment immediately, the government has decided that 10 thousand Special Police Officers (SPOs), about 1200 Para Military and about 4000 candidates in 5 IR battalion will be recruited. In addition, about 1 lakh 25 thousand persons will be trained under UDAN and HIMAYAT scheme so that unemployed people could get appropriate employment.
  The PDP-BJP government led by Ms. Mahbooba Mufti is making best efforts to address State’s various problems. During the last one month, Government has tackled the situation very carefully in spite of adverse situation. The whole nation stands with the Government.
  I would like to reiterate that the Central and State Governments are committed to address the people’s genuine grievances and restore peace in the state. We will strictly deal with the acts of violence, terrorism and anti India activities.  At the same time genuine grievances of every person will be heard and addressed.
  I would like to reinforce that all the political parties and countrymen will have to fight united against terrorism and destructive forces. At a time when terrorism is spreading its wings across the world and when we are surrounded by terrorism instigated by our neighbor, we will have to fight united the war against terrorism. The government has an expectation of constructive cooperation from all political parties in this matter. All political parties while burying their
 differences will have to cooperate in this matter to restore peace and prosperity in the state. I fully believe that with the active efforts of the state government and with your full cooperation, we will be able to restore normalcy in Jammu and Kashmir very soon.
 I would like to again reiterate about our main steps and policy in respect of Kashmir:
  1) It is the duty of any Government to maintain law and order. There will be no compromise with the act of terrorism.
  2) In this age, civil society, while integrating with citizen activities, will be promoted as per the democratic traditions.
  3) We will take forward the political process with reverence, in accordance with the democratic traditions.
  4) The process of connecting Kashmiri youth with economic activities of the state will be speeded up.
  5) The states in which people of Jammu & Kashmir are residing, whether they are Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs or Buddhists or of any religion, should approach them and should make efforts so that they can contact with their close relatives who are residing in Jammu & Kashmir and can apprise them about their own progress and the progress in other States of India.
  6) Ministry of External Affairs should make efforts to approach the people of PoK residing in different parts of world and collect the information about the miserable conditions in PoK and bring it to the knowledge of world community.
  I once again thank you all for giving your important views and suggestions in this meeting. I thank you all for supporting the Government. We all are committed to this national spirit that there cannot be a compromise on India’s territorial integrity. We are ready to address grievances of all sections within the framework of the Constitution. 
  Thanks!
#DELIMITER#
11 7 2016, Kenya
India Kenya Business Forum
I am happy to be with you on my first visit to Kenya as Prime Minister. Indians in general, and Gujaratis in particular, have had their second home in Kenya. So, from that perspective, I am really late in visiting this great country. There has been a long gap of nearly 35 years for the visit of Indian Prime Minister. Though at a personal level, I was able to maintain engagements with Kenya. As Chief Minister of Gujarat, I visited Kenya in 2008. We also received delegations in
Gujarat from here. 
At the outset, I must compliment the people and leadership of Kenya for overall development and stability since independence. Kenya’s economy and its infrastructure make it an influential player in the region. You are the only developing country which hosts the headquarters of UN agencies. 
Friends!
India and Kenya have had a very special relationship.
Thousands of Indians were brought here to build railways in 19th and 20th centuries;
Mahatma Gandhi has been a common inspiration for the Struggle against colonialism;
Indian banks have been operating in Kenya since 1953.
The first cuttings of the famous tea plantations of Kericho came from our Assam state.
In addition to being loyal citizens, Indians are also the third largest group of tourists to Kenya.
Your scholars and students consider India as a very comfortable place to live, learn and work;
No wonder, many words in Swahili language have their origin in Indian languages;
Both countries have had very old maritime contacts over the Indian Ocean;
Many Indian companies have made Kenya their base to operate in the entire East Africa.
Mr. President, I am aware that your government has laid great emphasis on the use of solar energy in daily life. We are also working on an ambitious renewable energy programme. India and Kenya are blessed by sufficient solar radiation. Solar energy is a real solution for global warming. It is also a good strategy for providing electricity to remote villages and hamlets. We look forward to work together on this front under the International Solar Alliance. 
Similarly, health sector is another area of great interest to both sides. We are happy that thousands of Kenyan patients have returned from India after a successful treatment. I understand that Kenya would like to replicate the Indian experience in Medicare and become a medical hub in the region. We would be happy to support you in this process. 
These are just a few indicators of the depth of our relationship and the potentials for co-operation.
Friends!
Our predicament of the past is same;
Our problems of the present are same;
We have had common enemies;
Earlier it was colonialism;
Now it is poverty.
So, as we worked together in the past; we have to work together even now. Like Kenya, India is also a young country. Your workforce is sought after in Africa. Similarly, the Indian work force is sought after in the entire world. We can do a lot together to nurture and train this human capital which can serve the whole world. 
Today, India is the fastest growing large economy of the world. We are not only having a high growth rate; we are also going up in various global indicators. 
We have jumped 12 ranks in the latest global ranking on Ease of doing business by the World Bank.
India has also jumped 16 places on the World Economic Forum’s global competitive index.
Friends!
India has changed a lot in last two years. We are now the most preferred destination for FDI. In the year of 2015, we have received highest ever FDI. And for you the good news is that India is the largest trading partner of Kenya. India is also the second largest investor here. We will be happy to further remove the imbalance in trade between us. We will also be happy to enhance the level of investment in Kenya. 
I am here to assure the people and Government of Kenya that India stands by you. Our friendship is only a win-win game. Whether it is Kenyan students in India; or Indian professionals in Kenya- both should shine. Whether it is mines, minerals or machines; all are rewarding areas. We should jointly explore the opportunities. Various initiatives during my visit including this meeting are indicators in that direction. 
Friends!
I assure Kenya that India will always work to strengthen your processes and enrich your resources. 
You may be knowing that we have launched 'Make in India' campaign to make India a global Manufacturing hub. Similarly, you have launched Make it Kenya to promote business and holiday opportunities. In fact, the two can become complimentary since our commitment is to make the future of the people and since the people are largely the same. Sweat of Indians has cemented the foundation of this nation. Indian blood has colored it's wings of freedom.It doesn't matter whether we Make in
Kenya or Make in India.
And Friends!
As a demonstration of our commitment for Make it Kenya;
We have printed a guide book on Doing Business in Kenya. 
This is for guiding the Indian Investors to invest here. 
It is my pleasure to present the book to His Excellency the President of Kenya. 
Thank You!
#DELIMITER#
11 7 2016, Kenya
University of Nairobi
Jambo! Habaari gaani (Hello, How are you)? 
I am happy to be here in energy filled surroundings.
I am truly delighted to be amongst the brightest and the best of Kenya.
You are the pride of this land; and represent Africa's tomorrow. Your aspirations, ambitions and actions will not only shape the direction and destiny of this great country. 
But, you will also guide the march of this great continent into a future of prosperity. To you, the passionate gen-next of Kenya, I bring the warm friendship of over 800 million youth of India. 
Of course, that includes me. 
You see friends, when it comes to nation building, or nurturing ties with friends like Kenya, my heart matches the youthful passion of any twenty year old. 
Dear Students,
The University of Nairobi is a glorious institution. It enjoys a formidable reputation. Not just in Africa but all over the world.
And, when I see your young, eager and intelligent faces, I know why. Generations of political leaders, engineers scientists social activists and artists have passed through the doors of this seat of learning. 
It has brought fame and repute to your country. And, it continues to mould Kenya's coming generations too. The University also showcases the shared history and similar experiences of India and Kenya as two developing countries. 
Just now, before entering this auditorium, I paid tribute to Mahatma Gandhi, whose statue at this University was unveiled exactly 60 years ago. The connection between Mahatma Gandhi and this fine University is among early bonds of partnership between our two great nations. 
It also echoes the value that our two societies place in having a strong education system for our national growth. 
We have an ancient Indian saying:
व्याये क्राते इवा नित्यं, विद्या धनं सर्व धन प्रधानम.
Means: the wealth that increases by giving, that wealth is knowledge and is supreme among all possessions.
I am told you also have a Swahili proverb:
"Pesa, kama matumizi yake, huisha; kujifunza, kama matumizi yake, huongezeka”,
That is, money if you use it, comes to an end; But, learning if you use it, increases.
Friends,
Kenya is a young nation in an ancient continent. But, even as a young nation you pride in several firsts.
Kenya’s Wangari Maathai, the famous environmental activist, was the first African woman to win the Nobel peace prize. 
She was a product of this university.
Lupita Nyongo of Kenyan origin is the first African to have won an Oscar award.
And, as we all know, and no prize for guessing here, that Kenyan runners lead and dominate the marathon races the world over. 
Kenya's climate nurtures not just the Big Five. But, it also provides the right eco-system for appropriate technology and innovation led growth.
It is an important financial and transportation hub in the East African region. It was in Kenya that M-Pesa was invented in 2007. 
The idea took the world by storm. It pioneered and led the growth of mobile money services globally. 
Not just in Kenya, but the world over. And, through M-pesa, those who stayed on the margins of financial system are now being empowered and mainstreamed. 
We now have a version in India as well.
Dear Students,
Today, both Kenya and India are flourishing democracies. We are two developing nations that seek peace and prosperity for their peoples.
And, our ties are age old. 
Through centuries, the links of commerce and culture, trade and tradition, ideas and ideals, and beliefs and values have connected our societies. 
And, in this, the warm waters of Indian Ocean have served as the bridge between our people. 
I understand that there are 42 tribes in Kenya and that people of Indian origin are called the forty third tribe.
Like the rich fabric of your society, India too has a long-standing tradition of celebrating its vibrant diversity.
Indeed, along with democracy, freedom and equality, it is the very essence of modern India.
Friends,
Last evening, President Kenyatta and I had a memorable interaction with the Indian diaspora. Many decades ago, they made Kenya their home. 
Their affection and loyalty to Kenya is foremost. They are one of the most effective catalysts in the forward march of our ties.
And, this close inter-mingling of our people is a strong foundation for us to realize the promise of our modern day partnership. 
Friends,
Let us also not forget that together, India and Africa represent a third of humanity. Contrary to what others might say, and there are many who might want to pull us down, we are by no means a minority in this inter-connected world. 
We want to forge a lasting partnership:
· That does not rely on old models and rules of engagement;
· One, which focuses on and empowers people; 
· One, where we share the fruits of each others' economic prosperity;
· One, which seizes the opportunities of twenty first century;
· And, also responds to its challenges to bring safety and security to our societies; and
· Above all, serves the larger common good of the region and other developing nations the world over. 
And, our partnership with Kenya is an integral part of this vision of the twenty first century engagement with all of Africa.
Friends,
Among the rising African economies, Kenya has been one of the strongest performers. 
You are a land of strong traditions. 
You are also a country with abundant opportunities.
On the other side of the Indian Ocean, at about 7.6% per annum, India is experiencing a great economic revolution.
Given the depth and extent of our challenges, there is no option for both of us but to sustain the high economic growth rate.
This opens up a world of opportunities for us to work together. Not just in political sphere, but also in economic, social and developmental fields.
And, at several levels. 
Already, we trade with each other more than ever before. With significant presence of Indian companies in Kenya, our investment partnership is robust, diverse and vibrant. 
This, in turn, creates jobs for the young and educated in both our societies. As flow of goods and capital between us increases, we must explore ways of working together to manufacture in different areas. 
Not just for Kenya and India but for Africa, and other regions. 
Health care is one area that immediately comes to mind. 
India's experiences in this field can help build systems, institutions and capacities in Kenya. And, our engagement in specialized medical skills can be of particular purpose and importance to Kenya's youth. 
Our growing trade ties in pharmaceuticals can be supplemented by manufacturing links. They can respond to the health needs in Kenya.
And, also meet the health care demands regionally. Kenya's future is in the hands of its youth.
Similarly, you may be interested to know that India's drive towards its destiny is also fuelled by India's 800 million youth. 
And for them, we have undertaken a nationwide campaign to create 500 million new jobs by 2022.
This, of course is not possible without skilling and educating our youth at a scale not seen before. 
'Skill India' and 'Start Up' India are aimed at transforming the face of employment generation and personal enterprise in India. 
We would be happy to share our capacities, experiences and abilities for the benefit of our Kenyan friends. 
We already have a robust cooperation in the field of institution and capacity building, especially in the field of education. 
But, that is not enough.
The need of the hour is to diversify it to areas such as Telecom, agriculture, energy and Information Technology.
Areas that would not just propel and modernize our economies, but, also create jobs for our skilled youth. 
Our shared developmental challenges do not face the problem of scale. 
And, between us we have the ability to generate access to cost efficient technologies. 
M-pesa showed how, combined with technology, a home grown idea can quickly and effectively transform the lives of excluded sections of our society. 
As our economies grow and our partnership thrives, we have a responsibility to ensure that it is not heavy handed on environment. 
Indeed, one of our shared values is respect for mother earth. 
And, the Nobel Laureate Wangari Maathai captured it beautifully. 
She said, and I quote, "We need to promote development that does not destroy our environment." 
Our common tradition to live in harmony with nature is an ideal platform for us to build a partnership for "Green Africa."
A partnership that would also create new economic opportunities.
In fact, protection of our environment is the prime driver for India to shape an International Solar Alliance.
It is aimed at harnessing the power of sun as a permanent renewable source of energy. 
The Alliance, which currently enjoys partnership of over 120 countries, is also one of the emerging areas of our engagement with Kenya. 
Similarly, India’s ancient heritage of yoga stands for holistic living that is in tune with nature.
I am delighted to know that over 7,000 yoga enthusiasts celebrated this International Yoga Day on 19 June in the grounds of the Nairobi University.
Friends,
A steady march towards our economic goals is indeed a priority.
But, we also cannot ignore the safety of our people. 
Our economic prosperity and social development would mean a lot more, if our societies were safe and our people secure.
As President Uhuru said in Delhi in October last year, terrorism is "an evil that knows no boundary, has no religion, no race and no values."
Indeed, we live in a world where preachers of hate and violence are threatening the fabric of our society.
As young dynamic citizens of Kenya and as members of the African society, you would need to be watchful of those who spread radical ideologies.
And, be equally condemning of those who give shelter to terrorists and use them as political instruments. 
Youth can also play an important role in building a counter narrative to extremist ideologies.
Students,
As two maritime trading nations, and as members of the Indian Ocean Rim Association, we also need to stand guard against sea borne threats. 
And, ensure that piracy does not threaten our trade and safety of our seafarers, and there is freedom of navigation for all. 
On way to Kenya, I had also visited Mozambique, South Africa and Tanzania. 
Over millennia, the East Coast of Africa has had strong maritime links with India.
Today, the same eastern coast is facing a complex set of strategic and security challenges.
The entire domain of maritime and coastal security is therefore mature for deeper engagement between our two countries. 
Dear Students,
This is the age of inter-dependence;
In this world of growing opportunities and complex challenges, you would inherit its tomorrow.
And, shape the future of this great country. 
A safe and prosperous Kenya and strong Africa is your destiny. 
Let no one take it away from you.
And, as you pursue your ambitions, you would do well to remember that nation building is an unending process.
As such, let you actions guide and lead others to:
· aspire high;
· dream big; and 
· do more.
Your motto says it all "Unitat et Labore”; work hard and in unity, the fruits of the labour will be yours.
And, as you march towards your destiny, you will find in India a trusted and reliable partner.
A partner:
· who would rejoice in your success;. 
· who would always be there with a helping hand. 
· And, who would be on your side in your hour of need. 
It has been a privilege speaking to you. 
I am grateful to the University of Nairobi, its faculty and most of all you the future of Kenya, its students, for this opportunity.
Asante sana, Dhanyavaad.
Thank you very much.
#DELIMITER#
11 7 2016, Kenya
Kenya Visit
Thank you for such a warm welcome.
I bring to you the greetings and good wishes of the 1.25 billion people of India. From over two millennia ago, the waters of the great Indian Ocean have facilitated the inter-mingling of our two peoples. We are maritime neighbours.
Communities from the western shores of India, especially from my home State Gujarat, and the eastern coast of Africa have settled in each other's lands. In end 19th century, Indians came to Kenya during the colonial era to build the iconic Mombasa Uganda railway. Many of them stayed and contributed to the economic development of Kenya. Several joined the freedom struggle, and stood shoulder to shoulder with Mzee Jomo Kenyatta, the founding president of Kenya. I count Makhan Singh,
Pio Gama Pinto, Chaman Lal, M.A Desai among others.Ancient links between societies have also enriched our cultures. The rich Swahili language includes many Hindi words.
Indian cuisine is now an intrinsic part of Kenyan cuisine.Excellency, Last evening, you and I saw first-hand the affection and bonds of the Indian diaspora with Kenya.They are a strong bridge between the two countries.And, we value this joint heritage. I am happy to return to your beautiful country which I first visited in 2008. This visit may have been short but the outcomes have been significant.I have been able to rekindle our personal friendship which began in New Delhi in October
2015.In the last few hours, we have been able to impart new vigour and momentum to our long-standing relations:Our political understanding and commitment have deepened.
We are ready to join hands with Kenya in fulfilling your development priorities:
-In sectors of your choosing; and
-at a speed that you prefer;And, be it:
-agriculture or health care;
- Needs of education, vocational education or training;
-development of small businesses;
-Renewable energy or power transmission; and
-building of institutional strengths.
Like in the past, our experiences and expertise are available for Kenya's benefit.
Excellency, we have a thriving economic and commercial relationship. But, it is not a temporary or transactional relationship. It is a time-tested bond, built on the foundation of shared values and shared experiences.
Friends,
Both India and Kenya have young populations. Both cultures value education. Now is the time for skill development.As the Swahili proverb goes: "Elimubilaamali, kamantabilaasali” (Means: Knowledge without practice is like wax without honey).Kenya and India have always worked for world peace. We can also unite our efforts with other developing countries, not just for the well-being of the weak and the poor.But, also to help preserve our Mother Earth.
We can learn from each other in the crucial area of conservation of natural assets. As Mzee Jomo Kenyatta said, "Our children may learn about heroes of the past. Our task is to make ourselves architects of the future”.
President Uhuru Kenyatta, Distinguished Guests,May I now raise a toast
To the health and well- being of the President of Kenya, His Excellency President Uhuru Kenyatta;
To the progress and prosperity of the people of Kenya, our Indian Ocean neighbours,
To the everlasting friendship between the people of India and Kenya
#DELIMITER#
8 7 2016, South Africa
South Africa Business Meet
His Excellency Mr Jacob Zuma,
President of the Republic of South Africa,
Hon'ble Minister of International Relations and Cooperation,
Hon'ble Minister of Trade and Industry,
Captains of South African and Indian Industry,
Ladies and Gentlemen!
I am happy to be with you today.
India-South Africa relations are built on a strong foundation of history.
We were directed together by destiny;
We are driven together by dreams.
Our history had many common chapters.
With struggle and sacrifice, we changed the course of history.
Fortunately, in this process,
we had the guidance of the greatest leaders which the human race has seen.
Friends,
Our leaders like Nelson Mandela and Mahatma Gandhi brought political freedom for us.
Now, it is the time to work for economic freedom.
Thus, our relations rest upon our common desire to fulfil the aspirations of our people.
We have been friends in adversities ;
Now we should franchise in opportunities
With the blessings of our great leaders, both the countries have marched on the path of development.
Both South Africa and India are important players in the BRICS economies.
Our people at home and the world at large are looking at us with great expectations.
We can join handsto fulfil these twin expectations.
It is heartening that we have had very active and fruitful engagement on all possible fronts.
This august gathering is also an important part of the same process.
Friends,
I admit that I am little late in visiting this great country.
However, President Zuma and I have met several times in last two years.
South Africa is India's key trade and investment partner.
In the last ten years, bilateral trade has grown almost 380%.
The story of investments also continues to be bright.
There is continuous flow of investments both ways.
More than 150 Indian companies are operating in South Africa.
Similarly, many companies of South Africa are doing excellent work in India.
However,
the scope is tremendous.
The potential is increasing day by day.
This is because both countries are strengthening their economic fundamentals.
Therefore, we must look at ways to diversify our trade basket, to complement our needs and to serve the people.
Our active partnership across various facets and forums is a testimony to the fact that such engagement is possible.
Friends,
For Indian companies, South Africa is a home in this continent.
Many leading Indian companies have a foot-print here.
They are engaged in a wide range of activities.
Many Indian CEOs are here with us.
My advice to them is to see that their business results into socio--economic transformation of this great country.
I have been advocating three Ps for India.
(Public Sector, Private Sector and People’s Partnership).
I have been emphasising on the Personal Sector.
The same applies here.
Skill development and community empowerment should be central to your business plans.
The spirit of African humanism , UBUNTU , should reflect in your business ethos.
This is equal to our philosophy of
सर्वे भवन्तु सुखिनः
This is what Mahatma Gandhi stood for.
We have always believed in nurturing and nourishing not in exploiting.
Encouraging fact is that our business engagement is not one way.
South African companies are also active in India.
Many of them have presence on ground.
We have learnt from your knowledge and benefited from your innovative products.
South African business excellence and Indian capacities must leverage each other; for growth and development in our two countries.
Friends,
In last two years we have worked very hard on all fronts to set the economy right.
We have got very encouraging results of our sincerity and hard work.
Today, India is a bright star in the global economy.
We are being seen as the engine of global growth.
India has become the fastest growing large economy in the world.
At a time of global slowdown, we have registered 7.6% growth in GDP.
World Bank, IMF and other institutions have projected even better growth in the coming days.
Not only that, in 2014-15, India contributed 12.5% of global growth.
Its contribution to global growth is 68% higher than its share of the world economy.
The FDI in this year has been the highest ever.
The ratings agency Moody's has said that FDI inflows were all-time high in 2016, highlighting the success of our 'Make in India' initiative.
Make in India has become the biggest brand that India has ever had.
Both within and outside the country, it has captured the imagination of people, institutions, industries, businesses, media and the political leadership.
As part of the Make in India exercise, we have given emphasis on Ease of Doing Business.
We have taken decisive steps to ease the licensing processes and rationalize the provisions relating to clearances, returns, and inspections.
If I talk of some other indicators:
India has consistently been ranked as the most attractive investment destination by several global agencies and institutions.
We have jumped 12 ranks in the latest global ranking by the World Bank on ease of doing business.
India has also improved its UNCTAD ranking of investment attractiveness.
Against 15th so far, now we are at 9th place.
India has also jumped 16 places on the World Economic Forum’s global competitive index.
Due to positive impact of our policies and practices, our confidence has gone up.
This also gives us motivation to further simplify our processes to become an easier place to do business.
An innovative Start-up India programme has also been launched to incubate ideas and develop them into enterprises.
All this is having a good impact on expansion of job market and rise in purchasing power of the people.
This finally leads to India becoming a place with better quality of life and higher living standards.
We have ensured that our growth is inclusive and embraces both rural and urban communities.
We are taking a leap towards next generation infrastructure in both core areas and social sectors.
Friends,
Socio-economic challenges of both our countries are more or less same.
My advice is that the wheels of development should not be re-invented.
Our two countries are very uniquely positioned to complement each other.
For example:
Nature has been kind on both of us.
We have immense natural resources.
The need is to properly harness them and to use them sustainably for welfare of the common man.
We can learn a lot from each other in this.
We particularly want to engage with your world class mining companies.
Some of them are already active in India.
But we want strategic engagements on this front.
Our interest in this sector is not one sided.v · Secondly, the challenge of climate change and the need of fast track development is before both of us.
We are both committed to clean and green pathways to progress.
At the same time, we need energy resources.
With the help of a number of countries, we have formed the International Solar Alliance.
I hope that we will enrich and take advantage of this forum.
Our two countries have the unique benefit of opposite seasons
When it is summer or mango season in India, it is winter here, and vice versa.
We can leverage this geographic advantage to market each other's fruits, vegetables and other perishables
India with its huge domestic market offers massive opportunities for your food processing industry.
Our collaboration in this sector will bring value for our farmers and our villages.
We in India are working on very ambitious plans of infrastructure.
The task which is pending from the days of independence has to be completed fast now.
Together, we can do a lot to fill these gaps.
India is best suited to help you in technology and skills.
Efforts are already underway in these areas.
At the India Africa Forum Summit held in New Delhi last year, we under-took to educate and train 50,000 Africans in India over the next five years.
These are just a few examples.
We can work together in a number of areas.
From Defence to Dairy;
From Hardware to Software;
From Medicines to Medical Tourism;
From Soft Skills to Science and Technology.
There are opportunities for us.
India today is among the most open economies.
We have liberalised our FDI regime in most of the areas and in all possible ways.
We have rationalised our norms and made it simple for businesses to establish and grow.
Friends,
To conclude, I would like to say that we have added institutional depth to our partnership.
Our BRICS business engagement and CEOs Forum have helped to expand and enrich our partnership.
Today, we have successfully held the 3rd Meeting of the India-South Africa CEOs Forum.
We value your recommen- -dations and look forward to putting them into practice.
We are thankful to the South African government for introducing 10 year BRICS (ब्रिक्स) visa for regular business travellers.
The Indian Industry is quite encouraged by the move.
In February this year, we launched our e-Visa programme for South Africa.
This is valid for short term tourist and business travellers.
You can now get your visa for India sitting at home in your email, and that too free of cost!
Friends,
Let us join hands once more;
Let us commit ourselves together once again;
This is necessary to fight the enemy of poverty;
This is perhaps much more challenging;
But we have to succeed;
And this only can be our real tribute to our great leaders.
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
30 11 2015, France
Climate Change Summit
President Hollande, Excellencies, 
The pain of Paris is yet to heal. So, I speak in admiration for your resilience and resolve. And, I salute the world for standing, in full strength, with France and Paris. 
Over the next few days, we will decide the fate of this planet. We do so when the consequences of the industrial age powered by fossil fuel are evident, especially on the lives of the poor. 
The prosperous still have a strong carbon footprint. And, the world's billions at the bottom of the development ladder are seeking space to grow. 
So, the choices are not easy. But, we have awareness and technology. We need now national will and a genuine global partnership. 
Democratic India must grow rapidly to meet the aspirations of 1.25 billion people, 300 million of whom are without access to energy. 
We are determined to do so, guided by our ancient belief that people and planet are inseparable; that human well being and Nature are indivisible. 
So, we have set ambitious targets. By 2030, we will reduce emissions by 33 to 35% per cent of 2005 levels, and 40 per cent of our installed capacity will be from our non- fossil fuels. 
We will achieve it by expanding renewable energy - for, example, by adding 175 Gigawatts of renewable generation by 2022. We will enlarge our forest cover to absorb at least 2.5 billion tonnes worth of carbon dioxide. 
We are reducing dependence on fossil fuel through levies and reduction in subsidies; switching sources of fuel where possible; and, transforming cities and public transportation. 
We hope advanced nations will assume ambitious targets and pursue them sincerely. It is not just a question of historical responsibility. They also have the most room to make the cuts and make the strongest impact. 
And, climate justice demands that, with the little carbon space we still have, developing countries should have enough room to grow. 
This also means aggressive mitigation action by developed countries before 2020, including ratification of 2nd Commitment period of Kyoto Protocol, removing conditions and revisiting targets. 
The principles of equity and common but differentiated responsibilities must remain the bedrock of our collective enterprise across all areas - mitigation, adaptation and means for implementation. Anything else would be morally wrong; and disparities. 
Equity means that national commitments must be consistent with the carbon space nations occupy. 
We also need a strong Agreement on Adaptation and Loss and Damage. 
Developed countries must fulfill their responsibility to make clean energy available, affordable and accessible to all in the developing world. This is in our collective interest. 
So, we look to the developed countries to mobilize 100 billion US Dollars annually by 2020 for mitigation and adaptation in the developing countries. They must fulfill their commitment in a credible, transparent and meaningful manner. 
Energy is a basic human need. So, we need an ambitious technology initiative, driven by a public purpose, not just market incentives. This includes intellectual property. For this, we need to scale up Green Climate Fund that will improve access to technology and intellectual property. 
We still need conventional energy. We should make it clean, not impose an end to its use. And, there should be no place for unilateral steps that become economic barriers for others. 
We welcome stocktaking that is transparent, covers both support and commitments, and based on differentiation. 
Ultimately, for success, moderating our lifestyle is necessary, and possible, for a low carbon future. 
Excellencies, The presence of 196 countries tells us that we have a chance to unite behind a common purpose. 
We will succeed if we have the wisdom and courage to craft a genuinely collective partnership that balances responsibilities and capabilities with aspirations and needs. 
I am confident that we will. 
Thank You.
#DELIMITER#
30 11 2015, France
Mission Innovation - Climate Change
President Hollande, President Obama, Excellencies, Mr. Bill Gates, Distinguished Guests, 
Let me begin by saluting President Hollande and the people of France for their courage and resolve; and, to the world for coming together for Paris and France. 
The outstanding arrangements reflect the character of this great nation. The world has assembled in Paris to change the course of our planet to a sustainable path. 
We must speak about goals and targets on carbon emissions and rise in global temperature. But, it is just as important to focus on the instruments that will make it natural and easy for the world to get there.
A vast section of humanity lives at the edge of poverty and in darkness after the sun sets. They need energy to light up their homes and power their future. 
And, they are also the most vulnerable to the consequences of an industrial age powered by fossil fuel. 
Access to energy and a better life is a universal aspiration. And, so are clean environment and healthy habitats. 
As the world's majority works its way to prosperity on a planet left with very limited carbon space , we have to do many things. 
We have to ensure, in the spirit of climate justice, that the life of a few does not crowd out the opportunities for the many still on the initial steps of the development ladder.
The advanced countries must leave enough room for developing countries to grow. And, we must strive for a lighter carbon footprint on our growth path. 
For that we must come together in a partnership to bring clean energy within the reach of all. 
Innovation is vital for combating climate change and ensuring climate justice.
That is what makes this Innovation Summit very special. This unites us behind a common purpose. 
We need research and innovation to make renewable energy much cheaper; more reliable; and, easier to connect to transmission grids. 
We can make conventional energy cleaner. And, we can develop newer sources of renewable energy. 
This is a global responsibility to our collective future. 
Our innovation initiative should be driven by public purpose, not just market incentives, including on intellectual property.
That also means strong public commitment by suppliers to developing countries. 
That will make clean energy technology available, accessible and affordable for all. 
This partnership will combine the responsibility of governments with the innovative capacity of the private sector. We will double our investments in research and innovation; and, deepen collaboration among ourselves. 
We should have an international network of 30-40 universities and labs focusing for next ten years on renewable energy. 
Innovation must be backed by means to make it affordable and ensure adoption.
We have a very successful models of public-private partnership with many countries present here. India is also building renewable capacity in developing countries, including small island states. 
The progress on clean energy technology and costs is impressive. If we raise the level of our efforts, we can transform the world. 
We will also lay the foundation of a new economy in new low carbon age. 
We will restore the balance between ecology and economy, and between our inheritance and obligation to the future. And, live up to Gandhiji's call to care for the world we shall not see. 
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
30 11 2015, France
Indian Pavilion - Climate Change
My Ministerial colleagues, Shri Prakash Javadekarji, Shri Piyush Goyalji, Distinguished guests I am delighted to inaugurate the Indian Pavilion.
This is the first day of a historic summit in Paris. 
We stand here in solidarity with Paris and France and in admiration for their resolve and courage. The entire world, 196 nations, have come together to shape the future of this world and the health of our planet.
This summit is of great significance to India's future, too. 
This pavilion is a window to our heritage and our progress; our traditions and our technology; our aspirations and our achievements. 
India's new economic momentum is a subject of international attention and a source of global opportunity. Our progress will not just change the lives of one-sixth of humanity. It will also mean a more successful and prosperous world. 
Equally, the choices the world makes here will have an impact on our development. 
Climate change is a major global challenge. 
But, climate change is not of our making. It is the result of global warming that came from the prosperity and progress of an industrial age powered by fossil fuel. 
But, we in India face its consequences today. We see it in the risks of our farmers, the changes in weather patterns, and the intensity of natural disasters. 
We are concerned about the rising oceans that will threaten our 7500 km of coastline and over 1300 islands. We worry about the retreat of glaciers that feed our rivers and nurture our civilisation. 
That is why the outcome in Paris so important. 
That is why we are here. 
We want the world to act with urgency. We want a comprehensive, equitable and durable agreement, which must lead us to restore the balance between humanity and Nature and between what we have inherited and what we will leave behind. 
This will mean a partnership in which those who have the luxury of choices and the capability of technology will make adjustments to sharply reduce their carbon emission. 
The extent of their commitment and the strength of their action must be consistent with the carbon space they occupy.
And, they must leave enough of what is left of our carbon space to let developing countries grow. 
They should share resources and technology with those who live between want and hope, so that we can meet the universal aspiration for clean energy. 
It will also mean that the developing world will also try to have a lighter carbon footprint on their growth path. 
We want the conviction of the world to be matched by efforts to create conditions in which we can succeed. 
Because our challenge is pressing, our efforts must be urgent. 
Friends, 
These will be the subject of negotiations over the next few days. 
I am here in the Indian Pavilion to say something else. And, I speak not just to the world, but also to our people. 
India's progress is our destiny and the right of our people. But, we are a nation that must also lead in combating climate change. 
It stems from our obligation to give our people clean air; clean rivers; resilient farms; healthy habitats; and, forests rich with life. 
It comes from our conviction that we must aim not just for higher incomes, but better quality of life. 
It comes from our commitment to the world. 
Above all, it arises, from our timeless traditions and beliefs. 
The choices a people make are shaped by their culture and beliefs. 
In India, Nature has always been treated as Mother. 
Since ancient times, we have seen humanity as part of Nature, not superior to it. The divine has manifested in Nature's diverse forms. 
We have always believed that Nature does not exist for human race, but that we can't exist without Nature. So, Nature is meant to provide and nurture, not to exploit. 
When Nature is in equilibrium, our lives and our world will be in balance.
This is what we learn from Kshetrapati Sukta in our 
Rig Veda. 
क्षेत्रस्य पते मधुमन्तमूर्मिं धेनुरिव पयो अस्मासु धुक्ष्व । 
मधुश्चुतं घृतमिव सुपूतमृतस्य नः पतयो मृळयन्तु ॥ 
This means: 
O Lord of Field, with the Sweet Waves of Mother Nature's blessings, may you milk our Fields like the Milk of a Cow 
With the Sweetness of Mother Nature's bounty, which falls like Clarified Butter, may You shed your Grace on us. 
This is why Atharva-Veda calls it a bounden duty that we must protect the Earth so that Life can be sustained. 
This is what we see in Gandhiji's life and his advice that the world has enough for everyone's need but not for anyone's greed. 
This is what we have tried to capture in the publication PARAMPARA that we have released today. 
This is why recycling and conservation comes naturally to us. And, why we have sacred groves across our nation. 
Friends,
And, it is this spirit that leads us to set an ambitious and comprehensive strategy to combat climate change. 
We have a target for renewable generation of 175 Gigawatt by 2022. We have got off to a good start, with nearly 12 GW likely to be installed by 2016, more than three times the current capacity. 
Like cellular phones before, we can use renewable energy to bring power to our 18000 unconnected villages quickly and cleanly. 
By 2030, 40% of our installed capacity will be based on non-fossil fuel. 
We will convert waste to energy. We will make our cities smart and sustainable, and transform public transportation, including through 50 new metro rail projects. 
We are investing in supercritical technology in thermal plants. We have imposed tax on coal and reduced subsidies on petroleum products. We are raising fuel standards for automobiles. And, we have introduced tax free bonds for renewable energy. 
We have a massive programme to expand our forest cover and protect our biodiversity. 
In the past few months, millions of households have switched to LED bulbs and we have plans to replace diesel by fuel cells to power the thousands of our telecom towers. 
Our vision of India as a global manufacturing hub rests on the simple principle of "zero defect, zero effect" – production that is perfect and leaves no footprint on environment. 
Our mission of "more crop per drop" will not only improve the lives of farmers, but will also reduce the pressure on a scarce resource.
And, research and innovation in clean energy is a high priority. 
We want to make conventional energy, like coal, cleaner. 
We will make renewable energy cheaper and convenient to install even in our homes. We want to make it more reliable and easier to feed into our transmission lines. 
From governments to communities, there are countless examples of innovation and enterprise that are restoring the health of our environment. 
I have tried to capture some of these initiatives in my book, Convenient Action, which we shall present today. 
Friends, 
This is the voice of our people, the call of our nation and the consensus of our polity. 
India's leadership on environment has been the vision of Indian leaders and successive governments – from Stockholm in 1975 to Copenhagen in 2009. 
We are raising our national effort to an entirely new level. And, we are intensifying our international partnerships. 
So, we come to Paris with our commitment, but we also come with hope. 
So, we approach the negotiations under the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change in a spirit of partnership, which must be based on the principles of equity and common but differentiated responsibilities. 
Later today, I will join leaders from major developed and developing world for an innovation summit; because I believe that innovation and technology hold the key to our collective success.
President Hollande and I will also co-chair the launch of my long cherished dream of an international solar alliance to promote greater use of solar energy in the 121 solar-rich nations. 
To call the world to look deep into the ancient wisdom of all our civilisations, cultures and religions, I had requested President Hollande to bring out a book of quotations from around the world. I am happy that we will release it today. 
And, I will also call for a change in lifestyles, so that we reduce the burden on our planet. For, the enduring success of our efforts will depend on the way we live and think.
In conclusion, therefore, let me return to the theme that defines us in India – the spirit of partnership, the belief in oneness with the whole that is Nature.
To the people of India and our friends in the world, I call you to live with the commitment of ‘Lokah Samastah Sukhinau Bhavantu’. 
The desire for well being should include our planet, our Nature, all countries and the entire humanity. 
If our thinking is right, we will form a true global partnership of capabilities and needs that leads us to a low carbon age. 
Thank you. 
#DELIMITER#
24 11 2015, Singapore
Singapore Economic Convention
Mr S. Iswaran, Minister for Trade and Industry, Hounorable Ministers and Dear Friends ! 
It is a matter of great pleasure to be here with you. I am really happy to address the India-Singapore Economic Convention. My visit has been very productive and positive. I had excellent meetings with Singapore leaders today morning. We have concluded the Strategic Partnership which takes the relationship to a new level of engagement. We have set a high level of ambition for this relationship. 
Friends! our historical ties and cultural proximity are our assets. A large Indian Diaspora is enriching the life and work environment of Singapore. In recent years, economic engagement has been a key driver of our relationship. Singapore is our 10th largest trade partner globally. It is also the 2nd largest in ASEAN. Bilateral trade has expanded manifold after the conclusion of Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement in 2005. Singapore has emerged as the 2nd largest source
of FDI into India. Outward Indian FDI to Singapore has also increased in recent times. Singapore is now one of the top destinations for Indian investments. 
A significantly large number of Indian companies are registered in Singapore. Singapore companies also have a level of familiarity with Indian market due to involvement over the past few decades. Our companies are positioned to explore and develop promising engagements. With the significant and growing number of companies of both sides and of foreign companies in both markets, I expect even more exciting partnerships.
• You have the habit of precision; India has the scope for expansion; 
• You are fond of going vertical; India's development is both vertical and horizontal
• You are an exciting incubator; India is a vast laboratory
Thus, Singapore and India can work together in many promising areas. 
Last month, I had the opportunity of laying the foundation of two projects in India with participation of Singapore. One is the new capital city of Andhra Pradesh–Amaravati. Singapore is involved in preparation of the Master Plan for this new city. Secondly, I have laid the foundation stone for the fourth container terminal at JNPT, Mumbai which is being built in partnership with PSA, Singapore. We are also exploring collaboration with Changi Airport to operate two Indian
airports. These are recent examples of the deepening of our economic partnership. 
Singapore is also an important and valuable friend of India in our global outlook. We regard Singapore as an essential ally in the implementation of our Look and Act East Policy. I am fully aware of the important role Singapore has played in the implementation of this policy. I look forward to working with Singapore in a bigger way. 
Beyond the bilateral scope, there are also significant opportunities through collaboration with third countries. One example is the ASEAN Economic Community which has come into effect. It is going to create a 2 trillion US Dollar market of 600 million people. It will further enable our businesses to jointly explore opportunities in the wider South East Asian region. 
The Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), comprising ASEAN and its six Dialogue Partners, is another potential opportunity for our companies. Recently, in the India Africa Forum Summit held in New Delhi, Singapore was a special invitee. This is recognition of another dimension of India-Singapore togetherness. We can work jointly in the African countries. 
Ladies and Gentlemen! 
India is undergoing economic and social transformation on a scale and a speed that is unmatched in history. Our growth rate was 7.3% in the last year. World Bank has projected even better growth this year. Indian economy is the fastest growing economy among major countries. We are also working hard that the benefits of this growth reaches to the common man. We have launched major schemes on financial inclusion. Our strategy is to: 
• Energise the Economy
• Empower the people
• fund the un-funded 
• secure the poor 
• and enhance the income level of all.
Money must reach the Marginalized. With this objective, we opened 190 million new bank accounts. Through them, we are trying to ensure direct transfer of benefits to the poor. This targeting is also bringing discipline in Government expenditure. We have also launched new insurance and pension schemes. Through a new Bank, called MUDRA, we are funding the small traders and businessmen. We have set time bound goals for providing access to housing, water, electricity and sanitation
for all. Thus, India is now the next frontier of economic revolution. Our changing paradigm has created new opportunities for global investor community. 
	These opportunities range from building 50 million affordable houses to setting up 100 smart cities; modernization of railway network and re-development of our railway stations to setting up new railway corridors; generation of 175 GW of renewable energy to transmission and distribution networks. Construction of National Highways, bridges, and Metro rail networks. 
	Such a huge potential for creation of infrastructure and production of goods will not be available in any other country. More importantly, no one place on the earth can offer the customer base on such a massive scale. 
	We are trying to harness this development potential through our policies and people. The campaigns like Digital India and Skill India are designed to prepare the people to take part in this process. We have witnessed massive growth in the number of start-ups in the recent past. Some of these have begun to challenge established global players. To tap this energy fully, we have recently launched the Start up India Campaign. Start up India, Stand up India. 
	Friends! In past few months, the interest of foreign investors in India has gone up tremendously. However, there were a number of regulatory and taxation issues which were adversely impacting on their sentiments. We have taken very decisive steps to remove many of long the pending concerns. 
	To give you some examples: 
	• We have expedited regulatory clearances including security and environmental clearance; 
	• We have greatly liberalised the licencing regime; 
	• We have increased the validity period of defence industrial licences up to eighteen years from three years; 
	• We have taken almost 60% of the defence items out of the licensing process and liberalised a number of restrictions like end-use certificate for the exports
	• We have clearly articulated that we will not resort to retrospective taxation
	• and we demonstrated this position in a number of ways
	• We have introduced the concept of composite sector caps for the FPIs and other foreign investors. 
	• We have notified the regulations for the Alternative Investment Funds and 
	• We have rationalized the capital gains tax regime for Real Estate Investment Trusts
	• We have modified the Permanent Establishment norms; 
	• We have also decided to defer the implementation of the General Anti-Avoidance Rules for two years; 
	• We have introduced the GST Bill in parliament; we are hopeful to roll it out in 2016; 
	• A new bankruptcy code and a new IPR policy is being drafted • The Company Law Tribunal is going to be formed soon. 
	• Our system for transparent auction and allocation of key natural resources like coal, spectrum, and iron ore has now become stable. 
	These are just a few examples. We are working hard to make sure that our tax regime is transparent and predictable. We are also keen to see that genuine investors and honest tax payers get quick and fair decisions on tax matters. To this objective we have already made a number of corrections.
As a result of our initiatives: 
• The sentiments for inflow of foreign investment are turning into commitments; 
• FDI inflows have gone up by 40% compared with previous year’s corresponding period. 
• Perceptions are turning into positive outcome- 
• We have jumped 12 ranks in the latest ranking by the World Bank on ease of doing business. 
• India climbs to become the world's 7th most valued nation brand with a 32% sprint in brand value. 
• India has consistently been ranked as the most attractive investment destination by several agencies and institutions. 
• India has also improved its UNCTAD ranking of investment attractiveness. We were 15th place so far. Now we are at 9th place. 
• India has also jumped 16 places on the World Economic Forum’s global competitive index. 
• MOODY’s have upgraded the rating of India as positive. 
Thus, just in eighteen months, we have successfully restored the credibility of India in the eyes of global players. As soon as my government took over, we started liberalizing the FDI regime alongwith other reforms. We allowed 100% FDI in railways and enhanced the FDI limit to 49% in Defence and Insurance. We are also conscious of the last mile operational issues in such policies. In that spirit, we are finetuning the procedures also. Early this month, we have taken very dynamic steps to
further open up the economy for FDI. 
With this last round of reforms: 
• India is among the most open economies for FDI. 
• Some new sectors have been fully opened for FDI 
• For most of the sectors, FDI clearances are now on automatic route
• In addition to Greenfield areas, many sectors can freely absorb FDI in Brownfield projects. This includes Roads, construction and medical devices. 
• Entry and exit conditions have been greatly relaxed for FDI
Friends! We are keen to scale up investments in next generation infrastructure including digital networks and clean energy. In addition to the core infrastructure, we are keen to invest in our social, industrial and agri-infrastructure to give better income and quality of life to our people. 
  With tight control over expenditure, we have greatly increased capital investment by the public sector. To leverage this, we are setting up National Investment and Infrastructure Fund. We are also coming up with Tax Free Infrastructure Bonds with a view to broaden the corporate bond market. This will also provide long term finance for infrastructure. For infrastructure, we have also decided to launch Rupee Bonds in some countries. Singapore could be among them. We are quite
eager to work with Singapore in this regard. 
Friends! About 800 million people in India are below the age of 35 years. Their aspirations, energy, enterprise and skills will be the force for India's economic transformation. But the immediate challenge is to productively employ the youth. For meeting this challenge, we need to provide a huge push to manufacturing which has stagnated at around 16% of the GDP for several decades. This share must reach around 25% in the short and medium term. With this in view, we have launched the “Make in
India” initiative. We are working on all fronts to make India a global manufacturing hub. We are creating the global skill pool to establish a modern economy with a world class manufacturing sector. 
To achieve these objectives, apart from vigorous exercise for ease of doing business, we have fast tracked approvals and clearances for industry and infrastructure. The hall mark of our strategy is Good Governance which is Participative and Policy Driven. 
Through PPP, we are encouraging private investments in areas where earlier only government used to invest. We are also divesting our stake in the public sector enterprises, to instill market discipline. We are consistently working to integrate our economy with the rest of the world. I hope to further dedicate the next three months to address even the remotest issues affecting free flow of capital and business to India. 
Friends! Whatever we are doing; it is driven by two basic commitments: One is that our people should be in the center. It is for them that we want investments. Our faster growth will transform lives of one sixth of global community. 
The second commitment is towards our climate, our planet, our Nature. Our commitment to mitigate the dangers of climate change do not arise from Economics or Politics. They also do not arise from Fear or Favour. They arise from our fundamental belief that nature is our Mother. Nature provides and sustains our life; hence we must nurture it. It is an article of faith. I assure the Global community that we will do more than required. We will stretch ourselves to do more than what we
can normally do.
Both these commitments generate a wave of economic opportunities and activities which cannot be matched by any other country. They also open up enormous opportunities for investors. 
To sum up; I would like to say that In the last eighteen months, 
• Reforms are happening in a big way. They are now reaching to the last mile; 
• Reform is to Transform the systems so that they Perform; 
• Simply put, they aim at enabling the people to realise their potentials and dreams; 
• Putting even more simply, it means more charm on the faces and less forms in offices; 
• In addition, new frontiers and Deeper Foundations for financial markets have been laid; 
• All together, Runways for take –off of the economy have been made. 
Recently, the IMF chief has said that India is a bright spot in the Global economy. I did not want to wait for that brightness to reach to you on its own. 
Hence, I am here. 
I am here to invite you to India in a bigger way. 
I have also come to assure you that I am there to carefully hold your hands. 
Thank you! Very much, thank you.
#DELIMITER#
23 11 2015, Singapore
Singapore Lecture
Excellency, Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong
Excellency, Deputy Prime Minister Tharman Shanmugaratnam
Honourable Ministers,
Professor Tan Tai Yong,
Distinguished guests,
Thank you for the honour and privilege of delivering the Singapore Lecture.
I am conscious that I walk in the footsteps of leaders who have shaped modern India and our relationship with this region –President Shri APJ Abdul Kalam, Prime Minister Shri P.V. Narsimha Rao, and former Prime Minister Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee.
Mr. Prime Minister, I am deeply honoured that you have joined us here. 
We have been on the road together in the past few weeks – for the G20 and the ASEAN and East Asia Summits. 
This tells you how deeply linked the destinies of our two nations are .
To the people of Singapore, on 50 years of Independence, I extend the greetings and the good wishes of 1.25 billion friends and admirers. 
In the life of humans and nations, milestones of time are natural. 
But, few countries can celebrate the first fifty years of existence with a sense of pride and satisfaction that Singapore deserves to. 
And, I can do no better than to begin with homage to one of the tallest leaders of our time and the architect of modern Singapore – Lee Kuan Yew. 
To capture his mission in own words, he gave his life to see a successful Singapore.
And, it was with his well known steely determination that he saw Singapore through to its golden jubilee year. 
His impact was global. And, in him, India had a well wisher, who spoke with the honesty of true friendship. He believed in India’s potential at home and her role abroad more than many in India. 
For me, he was a personal inspiration. From his Singapore Stories, I drew many lessons. 
The most profound, yet simple, idea was that transformation of a nation begins with a change in the way we are. And, that it was as important to keep your city and surroundings clean as it was to build modern infrastructure. 
For me, too, in India, the Swachh Bharat campaign, is not just a programme to clean our environment, but to transform the way we think, live and work. 
For quality, efficiency, and productivity are not just technical measures, but also a state of mind and a way of life. 
So, in my visit to Singapore this March and in the observance of a day’s mourning in India, we wanted to honour a true friend and a very special relationship. 
Singapore is a nation that has become a metaphor for the reality of dreams. 
Singapore teaches us many things. 
The size of a nation is no barrier to the scale of its achievements. 
And, the lack of resources is no constraint for inspiration, imagination, and innovation. 
When a nation embraces diversity, it can unite behind a common purpose.
And, international leadership flows from the power of thought, not just from the orthodox measures of strength. 
Singapore has done more than just lift a nation into the highest levels of prosperity within a generation. 
It has inspired this region’s progress and led in its integration. 
And, it has made others believe that the possibility of progress is within our horizons, not an unseen and distant hope. 
Singapore’s success flows not from the aggregate of numbers and the size of investments. 
It is based on what I believe is the key to success: the quality of human resources, the belief of a people and the resolve of a nation. 
Distinguished members of the audience, 
It is with the same vision that we are pursuing the transformation of India. 
People are the purpose of our efforts; and, they will be the power behind change.
I do not judge the success of our efforts from the cold statistics of number, but from the warm glow of smile on human faces.
So, one set of our policies are to empower our people.
The other set to create the conditions in which enterprise flourishes, opportunities expand and the potential of our citizens are unlocked. 
So, we are investing in our people through skills and education; special focus on the girl child; financial inclusion; sustainable habitats; clean rivers and smart cities; and, access to basic needs of all our citizens – from water and sanitation to power and housing.
We will nurture and defend an environment in which every citizen belongs and participates, secure of her rights and confident about her opportunities. 
And, we are creating opportunities by reforming our laws, regulations, policies, processes and institutions; by the way we govern ourselves; and the way we work with state governments.
Together with this software of change, we are also building the hardware of progress – next generation infrastructure, revived manufacturing, improved agriculture, easier trade and smarter services. 
That is why we are moving on many fronts at the same time, aware of the linkages that make up a comprehensive strategy.
I learnt long ago that Singaporeans are too well informed about India to be burdened with numbers by a visitor, even from India. 
In any case, for me, the emergence of India as the fastest growing major economy in the world is less important than what is more enduring: the wheels of change are moving; confidence is growing; resolve is stronger; and, the direction is clearer. 
And, it is spreading across the nation, as the most distant village and the farthest citizen begin to join the mainstream of national economy.
Distinguished guests, 
India and Singapore have been together at many crossroads of time. 
Our relationship is written in the pages of history, the footprints of culture, the ties of kinship and the old connection of commerce. 
We stood together in friendship at the dawn of freedom; and, we reached out to each other in a partnership of shared hopes. 
Singapore’s success became an aspiration of Indians. And, in turn, India became the hope for a more peaceful, balanced and stable world. 
As India opened itself, Singapore became India's springboard to the world and gateway to the East. 
No one worked harder for it and no one deserves more credit for it than Emeritus Senior Minister Goh Chok Tong. He re-connected India to Singapore and the region. 
He also opened my eyes to its vast prospects. 
Today, Singapore is one of our most important partners in the world. It is a relationship that is as strategic as it is wide-ranging. 
We have comprehensive defence and security relations. It flows out of shared interests and a common vision. Singapore holds regular exercises with and in India. 
Singapore is the biggest investment source and destination for India in the world; the world's most connected nation to India; the largest trading partner in Southeast Asia; and, a popular destination for tourists and students. 
Now, as we build the India of our dreams, Singapore is already a major partner in that enterprise: world class human resources, smart cities, clean rivers, clean energy, or next generation sustainable infrastructure. 
Starting from the first IT Park in Bengaluru, it now includes the newest state capital in India, Amravati in Andhra Pradesh. 
Our partnership will expand as our economies grow and the framework of trade and investment improves further. 
But, I have always seen Singapore in loftier terms. 
Singapore's success in overcoming odds leads me to seek a partnership that addresses the challenges of 21st century – from food and water to clean energy and sustainable habitats. 
And, in many ways, Singapore will also influence the course of our region in this century. 
Mr. Prime Minister, Distinguished members,
This area covers the arc of Asia Pacific and Indian Ocean Regions. However we choose to define it, the underlining theme of connected histories and interconnected destinies stand out clearly. 
This is a region of expanding freedom and prosperity. It is home to two of the most populous nations; some of the world’s largest economies; and, the world’s most talented and hard working people. 
Asia's re-emergence is the greatest phenomenon of our era.
From the darkness of the middle of the last century, Japan led Asia’s rise. It then extended to Southeast Asia, Korea and China. 
And, India is now the bright hope for sustaining Asian dynamism and prosperity. 
But, this is also a region with many unsettled questions and unresolved disputes; of competing claims and contested norms; of expanding military power and extending shadow of terrorism; and, uncertainties on seas and vulnerability in cyber space.
The region is not an island in a vast ocean, but deeply connected and influenced by the world beyond.
We are also a region of disparities within and between states; where the challenges of habitats, food and water remain; where our gifts of Nature and wealth of traditions feel the pressure of rapid progress; and, our agriculture and islands are threatened by climate change. 
Asia has seen some of this at different points of its history. But, it has probably never been here before. And, Asia is still finding a path through its multiple transitions to a peaceful, stable and prosperous future. 
It is a journey that must succeed. 
And, Singapore and India must work together to realize it. 
India’s history has been inseparable from Asia. 
There were times when we turned inwards.
And now, as we reintegrate more closely with Asia, we are returning to history. We are retracing our ancient maritime and land routes with the natural instincts of an ancient relationship.
And, in the course of last eighteen months, my government has engaged more with this region than any other in the world.
From a new opening with Pacific Island Nations, Australia and Mongolia to more intense engagement with China, Japan, Korea and ASEAN members, we have pursued our vision with purpose and vigour. 
India and China share a boundary and five millennia of continuous engagement. Monks and merchants have nurtured our ties and enriched our societies. 
It’s a history reflected in the seventh century journey of XuanZang that I have had the privilege of connecting, from my birthplace in Gujarat to Xian in China, where President Xi hosted me this May. 
We see it in religious texts written in Sanskrit, Pali, and Chinese; in the letters of the past, exchanged with warmth and grace; in India’s famous tanchoi sarees; and, in Cinapatta, the Sanskrit name for silk. 
Today, we constitute two-fifth of humanity and two of the world’s fastest growing major economies. China’s economic transformation is an inspiration for us. 
And, as it rebalances its economy, and as India steps up the pace of its growth, we can both reinforce each other’s progress. And, we can advance stability and prosperity in our region. 
And, together, we can be more effective in addressing our common global challenges, from trade to climate change. 
We have our unresolved issues, including our boundary question, but we have been able to keep our border region peaceful and stable. And, we have agreed to strengthen strategic communication and expand convergences. We explore shared economic opportunities while addressing common threats like terrorism. 
India and China will engage constructively across the complexity of their relationship as two self-assured and confident nations, aware of their interests and responsibilities. 
Just as China's rise has driven the global economy, the world looks to China to help advance global and regional peace and stability. 
India and Japan may have discovered each other somewhat later. But, my friend, Prime Minister Abe, showed me in the magnificent shrines of Kyoto the symbols of our much longer spiritual engagement. 
And, more than a hundred years ago , as Swami Vivekananda reached the shores of Japan, he exhorted the Indian youth to go east to Japan. 
Independent India took that advice seriously. There are few partnerships that enjoy so much goodwill in India as our relations with Japan. 
No nation has contributed so much to India’s modernization and progress Japan – cars, metros and industrial parks, for example. And, no partner is likely to play as big a role in India's transformation as Japan. 
We do more together now. We see this as a strategic partnership that is vital for securing a peaceful and stable Asia, Pacific and Indian Ocean Regions. 
With Korea and Australia, our relationships started with strong economic foundations, and have become strategic in content.
And, ASEAN is the anchor of our Act East Policy. We are linked by geography and history, united against many common challenges and bound by many shared aspirations. 
With each ASEAN member, we have deepening political, security, defence and economic ties. And, as ASEAN Community leads the way to regional integration, we look forward to a more dynamic partnership between India and ASEAN that holds rich potential for our 1.9 billion people.
With almost the entire region, India has frameworks of economic cooperation. We want to be more deeply integrated with the regional economy. And, we will upgrade our partnership agreements and work for an early conclusion of Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement. 
In the flux and transition of our times, the most critical need in this region is to uphold and strengthen the rules and norms that must define our collective behavior. 
This is why we must all come together, in East Asia Summit and other forums, to build a cooperative and collaborative future, not on the strength of a few, but on the consent of all. 
India will work with countries in the region and beyond, including the United States and Russia, our East Asia Summit partners, to ensure that our commons - ocean, space and cyber – remain avenues of shared prosperity, not become new theatres of contests. 
India will lend its strength to keep the seas safe, secure and free for the benefit of all. 
This is an age of inter-dependence when nations must come together, to realize the promise of this century. We must also do so because our pressing challenges are not from one another, but common to each of us. 
Terrorism is one such major global challenge, and a force larger than individual groups. its shadow stretches across our societies and our nations, both in recruitment and choice of targets. It does not just take a toll of lives, but can derail economies. 
The world must speak in one voice and act in unison. There will be political, legal, military and intelligence efforts. But, we must do more. 
Countries also must be held accountable for sanctuaries, support, arms and funds. 
Nations must cooperate more with each other. Societies must reach out within and to each other. We must delink terrorism from religion, and assert the human values that define every faith. 
We are a few days away from Paris, where we must achieve concrete outcome, in accordance with the principles of UN Framework Convention on Climate Change. This is especially important for our region, particularly the small island states. 
Friends,
Ours is a region of enormous promise. But, we know that enduring peace and prosperity are not inevitable. 
So, we must work hard to realize our vision of an Asian Century. 
Asia has the wisdom of its ancient cultures and all the great religions of the world. It also has the energy and drive of youth. 
As Asia’s first Nobel Laureate Rabindranath Tagore predicted on a visit to this region nearly a century ago, Asia is regaining its self-consciousness for realization of its own self. 
Here in Singapore, where the region's currents merge; its diversity converges; ideas meet; and, aspirations gather wings, I feel that we are closer to that vision than ever before. 
And as India pursues its transformation and strives for a peaceful and stable world, Singapore will be a major partner on that journey. 
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
23 11 2015, Malaysia
Malysia Visit
His Excellency Prime Minister Dato Sri Najib Tun Razak ji, 
Members of the Media,
Thank you, Mr. Prime Minister, for your warm sentiments and generous hospitality.
I deeply appreciate your gesture of hosting me in the midst of ASEAN and East Asia Summits.
I congratulate you on the outstanding summits, and for the establishment of the ASEAN Community. Your review of the EAS on its tenth anniversary set an excellent course for this region's most important forum.
The two back-to-back airline tragedies could sap the morale of any nation. I commend your leadership and the resolve and resilience of the Malaysian people.
Mr. Prime Minister, let me say how deeply we value our relations with Malaysia. And, we are grateful for your stewardship that has kept our relationship on a steady course of progress.
There are many dimensions to our connected histories. We have very old links of culture and religion. The Malaysian-Indian community forms a very special and strong bond between us. I had the opportunity to speak to them last evening.
We are defined by diversity and democracy. We have built a vibrant economic partnership. We are located on the same maritime route.
We are closely aligned in our vision and approach to the region, and work closely in regional forums.
So, with a relationship as rich as this, I am pleased that we have agreed to make our Summits, ministerial dialogues and official meetings more regular.
I assure you that we will work with renewed vigour to raise the level to momentum of our partnership.
I am particularly grateful to you for our security cooperation. It underlines our shared commitment to deal with our security challenges. We will continue to deepen our cooperation in this area.
The recent spate of attacks in different countries, not to mention the ceaseless terrorist attempts against India and Afghanistan, are a reminder of the global nature of this threat.
Mr. Prime Minister, you have provided leadership in combating extremism and radicalization, rejecting any link between terrorism and religion, and in highlighting the real values of Islam.
This is a great contribution to an important aspect of our global efforts against this challenge.
We will also make our defence cooperation stronger, including for advancing maritime security and strengthening disaster response in our region.
I am pleased that we have agreed to upgrade our joint exercises and set up the SU-30 Forum.
We will do more in terms of level and complexity of exercises and collaboration in training and defence equipment.
Our agreement to cooperate in cyber security is very important. As our lives get more networked, this is emerging as one of the most serious concerns of our age.
I share Prime Minister's belief that our trade and investment relations can be scaled up significantly. We intend to exploit the full potential of our bilateral agreements and the India-ASEAN Agreements.
We look forward to an early conclusion of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement.
Malaysian competence in infrastructure is well known. Malaysia has completed several important projects, including in the road sector, in India.
I expressed our desire to see enhanced Malaysian participation in areas such as expansion and upgrading of infrastructure, Make in India, and Smart Cities projects.
Indian companies have a strong presence in Malaysia. IRCON is contributing to development of rail infrastructure here. We want to raise the level of Indian presence in the Malaysian economy.
Prime Minister and I are determined to explore steps to show concrete and early results. I am also meeting Malaysian CEOs later today.
I am happy that we are strengthening our excellent cooperation in Public Administration and Governance. I have personally interacted with PEMANDU, and am pleased that our Niti Ayog will work with them.
We will place special emphasis on cultural and people-to-people ties.
As you know, Prime Minister Najib and I will inaugurate the Torana Gate at the entrance of Little India in Bricksfield. This is a gift of India, but a labour of love for Prime Minister Najib. And, it will be a symbol of our timeless ties and the friendship between our people.
We invite Malaysian students to study in India and urge early conclusion of an agreement on Mutual Recognition of Degrees.
I am very pleased with our excellent and growing cooperation in Traditional Medicine, including Ayurveda and Siddha.
Mr. Prime Minister, thank you for a very productive discussion. I am confident that our strategic partnership will go to new level. I look forward to your visit to India soon.
Thank you very much.
#DELIMITER#
22 11 2015, Malaysia
Indian community reception, Malaysia
Vanakkam 
My dear friends, brothers and sisters 
Ungalil palar tamilnattai sernthavargal. 
Many of you are from Tamil Nadu.. 
Ungal anaivarukkum vanakkam. Vanakkam to all of you 
Indiavin valarchiyil Tamilnattin pangu mukkiam. 
Tamil Nadu's role in India's growth is important.
Namaskar, 
I am delighted to visit Malaysia. And, to be with you, here in this huge arena is a true pleasure. 
For me, India is not confined to its territory. India also exists in every Indian in every part of the world. India is in you. 
As I stand before you, I am reminded of the words of the great Tamil saint Thiruvalluvar: 
“Friendship is not just a smile on the face. It is what is felt deep within a smiling heart.” 
Mahatma Gandhi had once said that he wanted to learn Tamil to study Thiruvalluvar's Thirukurral in its original form, as there was no one who had given such treasures of wisdom as he had. 
The saint’s words on friendship capture the feeling that I get each time I come to Malaysia. 
It does not matter, whether I came here without office or I come now as a Prime Minister of India. 
I have felt the same embrace of friendship and welcome. The love and friendship of the Malaya-Indians has always had a special place in my heart. 
Generations ago, many of your ancestors came to an unknown land. 
Many of you came here more recently in the mobility of our globalised world. 
Whenever you came here, whatever be the circumstance in which you came, time or distance has not reduced your love for India. 
I see this in the light and colour of the festivals. They are as bright as they have always been. 
I see this in the pure strains of music, the grace of the dancer, the bells of devotion and the call to prayer. 
And, Malaya-Indians are the largest contingent to the annual Pravasi Bharatiya Diwas in India. 
And, Malay Indians make Vibrant Gujarat Summit more vibrant. 
India and Malaysia were once under the same colonial power. We both became free within a decade of each other. 
And, Independent India owes a debt of gratitude to Malaya-Indians. The glory of India's freedom struggle was written, in part, by the struggles and sacrifices of Malaya-Indians. 
Thousands of your forefathers came forward to join Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose and the Indian National Army. Women poured out in large numbers from the comfort of their homes to march shoulder to shoulder with Netaji Subhash Bose. 
Today I pay special tribute to Puan Sri Capt. Janaky Athi Nahappan, who served as deputy to Capt. Lakshmi Sehgal. That was in the regiment named after yet another icon of India's war of Independence, Rani of Jhansi. 
On behalf of every Indian, I also honour all the unnamed and unknown Malaya-Indians, who laid down their lives so that a free India could rise. 
To their children and grand-children, I say a big thank you. 
And, here in Kuala Lumpur, we will name our Indian Cultural Centre after Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose. 
70 years ago a tragic and deadly World War came to an end. 
I also pay homage to the countless Indian soldiers who lost their lives in the battle fields of Malaysia. A majority of those who laid down their lives were Sikhs. 
Their blood is permanently mixed with the soil of Malaysia. It was a war that mattered for both our countries. And, their blood in the Malaysian soil now forms a bond between our two countries that can never be erased.
And, the valour and duty they stood for is alive in the spirit of the Punjab Regiment, the Sikh Regiment, the Jat Regiment and the Dogra Regiment in India. 
We are prepared to work with the Government of Malaysia to build a War Memorial to our fallen soldiers at the site of Battle of Kampar in Perak. 
Brothers and sisters, 
While Malaya-Indians were responding with courage and passion to the call of Netaji, they were also inspired by the life and mission of Mahatma Gandhi. 
To the Indian community in Sungai Petani, I salute you for the Gandhi Memorial Hall that you built within a few years of his martyrdom. 
You had not met him. Gandhiji did not manage to visit Malaysia. But, he touched your hearts. 
And, as a community you came together to build that memorial on your own: To honour his memory: in respect for his principles; in a tribute to what he had done for Mother India and mankind. 
There are few things that can be as moving as this: a homage in silence, expressed in action, and built into a living memorial. 
And it is my proud privilege to announce that we will install a Bust of Gandhiji at the Gandhi Memorial Hall. 
Your spirit of service remains strong. And, in 2001, when the earthquake hit my state of Gujarat, Malay Indians came together on their own to raise funds to help victims reclaim life. 
From your moving contribution to the freedom struggle to the thriving richness of your culture, India lives in your heart. 
You always have a special place in our thoughts. 
My dear brothers and sisters, 
The spirit of India speaks in your deeds. 
You reflect India’s diversity of languages, religions and cultures. And, you stand together in a spirit of harmony. Not just with other Malay Indians, but also with all Malay people. 
Your achievements have done us proud. You have toiled with your hands. With pride and dignity, you made your life here. 
And, with every generation, you have achieved more success in politics, public life, government and professional services. 
You prosper in trade and you make the plantation produce more. 
You have contributed to build Malaysia into a vibrant modern nation and an economic power house. 
And, you are helping relations between India and Malaysia become stronger and stronger. 
I see this in the work of Dr. Subramaniam, Malaysia’s Cabinet Minister for Health. It is right that a Malay Indian holds this post, since Malay Indians love to become doctors! 
And I am pleased that a distinguished Malay Indian, Datu Samy Vellu, is Malaysia’s special Envoy for Cooperation in Infrastructure between India and South Asia. 
My dear brothers and sisters, 
You are the living bonds of friendship between our two nations. 
You reflect a link between India and Malaysia that is ancient as our lands. 
From the coast of Coromandal and Kalinga, the ocean carried trade, commerce and culture to the Malaya Peninsula. 
If there is trade, Gujarat cannot be far behind. So, Gujaratis also joined the trade. 
In the ruins of the Bujang valley in the State of Kedah, we see the glory of the great Pallava and Chola dynasties in Tamil Nadu. 
And the spice route that connected us brought the same flavours to our food. 
Our ties are seen in the footprints of the monks, who spread the message of peace from the land of Buddha to the Southeast Asia. 
This is the richness of our heritage. This is the ancient foundation of our modern links. 
Today, I had the honour of visiting the Ramakrishna Mission and unveiling the statue of Swami Vivekananda. 
This is not only a deeply spiritual moment for me personally. It also recalls the great journey he undertook more than a century ago, through this region to America. 
There he drew upon India's ancient wisdom to make a passionate call for unity in the world. He spoke for Asian spirit that is needed today when we dream of an Asian century. 
And at a time of great challenges in the world, this statue on the soil of Malaysia is a reminder to the world of the values we so deeply need to repair the fault-lines that are tearing our societies apart. 
And, tomorrow Prime Minister Najib and I will jointly inaugurate the Torana Gate at Little India in Brickfields. 
This is a gift from India and it looks like the gate at the famous Sanchi Stupa in India. That was built more than two thousand years ago. It is one of the most venerated Buddhist sites in the world. 
So, any visitor coming to Little India will be reminded of the message of peace between people; harmony between man and nature; and the relationship between the people of our two great countries. 
Above all, the statue and the gate will be a tribute to Malaysia's diversity and harmony. 
My dear brothers and sisters,
Malaysia's achievements are enormous. Just six decades after Malaysia gained independence, this nation of 30 million people has much to be proud of. 
It has nearly eliminated poverty. It has placed basic needs within the reach of its entire population. It has achieved nearly 100 percent literacy. And, it is providing jobs to everyone who needs it or wants it. 
Its tourism sector is flourishing. And, it has preserved its beautiful gifts of Nature. 
Its infrastructure is world class. It ranks very high on the "ease of doing business". And, for five decades, it has averaged a growth rate of over 6 per cent per year. 
And this is a truly extraordinary achievement for any country. 
One of the famous tourism slogans of Malaysia is – "Malaysia, Truly Asia". 
Malaysia truly lives up to that image: living in harmony across diversity; blending tradition with modernity; innovation and hard work; and, pursuit of peace in the region. 
Friends, 
India, the land of your heritage, has remarkable achievements since Independence. 
This was a nation made weaker by colonialism; torn by Partition at its birth as Independent country. 
It is a land of unparalleled diversity and vast social and political challenges. 
There were questions whether the infant nation will even reach its teen years. There were somewho did not want it to. 
Today, India is not just united, but draws strength from its diversity. 
There are many countries, where the high hopes of democracy at birth have faded along the way. 
India is a proud democratic nation, of 1.25 billion people, who have a chance to exercise their franchise. 
It is a young country, with 800 million youth under the age of 35 years. 
It is nation, where every citizen belongs; where everyone has equal rights that the constitution guarantees, the courts protect and the government defends. 
We have many achievements to our credit. We are a leading producer of food grain, fruits, vegetables and milk. 
Our scientists are harnessing the power of Space to improve the quality of life of our people. 
We have mastered the boundless power of the atom for energy and medicine. 
We are developing vaccines and drugs that puts healthcare within the reach of the poorest. 
We produce the best information technology specialists in the world. 
We produce doctors and engineers who serve the world. 
And, we are making products that are finding their way into the global market. 
Our external relations advances peace in the world. 
The Indian Armed Forces contribute to region’s security and stability. They assist all in humanitarian disasters, without asking their nationality. 
And, our forces participate in peacekeeping missions around the world. 
We have generations of our leaders to thank for bringing us this far. 
But, we know that we have a long way to go. The challenges we face and the goals we must pursue, are evident in villages and cities. 
And, my government has come into office to change that: 
We are eradicating poverty, by giving our people the fruits of modern economy, such as universal access to banks and insurance; not just tie them down in endless programmes. 
Where in the world will 190 million bank accounts be opened in a few months? 
We are empowering them with skills and education. 
We are creating an environment in which enterprise flourishes and people have opportunities to raise their income levels. 
We are creating infrastructure that gives people their basic needs of roof, water, sanitation, electricity, schools, and medical help within the reach and means. 
We are facilitating business. And, we are creating a national digital infrastructure that allows ideas, information, communication, business and innovation to flow freely on the cyber space. 
We are making our railways the engine of a new economic revolution in the country. And, we are turning our ports and airports into gateways to prosperity. 
And, we have pledged to make our cities clean and healthy; restore our rivers; and transform our villages. 
And, we will preserve the treasures of Nature for the tourists to enjoy and our future generations to see. 
And, all this is not easy. After all, we are talking of 1.25 billion people, more than 500 major cities and six hundred thousand villages. 
But, we have faith in the talent and enterprise of Indians. We have confidence in the strength of the joined hands of our people. 
So, it is happening. The wheels of change have begun to move. And, they are gathering speed now. 
And, it is showing in numbers. 
India is today the fastest growing major economy in the world. I know you feel proud about it. 
We are running at 7.5% per year, but will grow even faster in the coming years.
Every major global institution has placed its bets on India growing strongly. This is at a time when the rest of the world, including parts of this region, is experiencing a slowdown. 
There is change in the cities. There is momentum in the villages. And, there is confidence in our citizens, especially our youth. 
And, there is change in the way government is working. 
We are making government transparent and accountable. We are eliminating corruption at all levels. We are making governance driven by policies and systems, not by discretion of individuals. 
We are changing the way government and citizens interact with each other. And, Central and State Governments work with each other. 
States compete with each other now. That is healthy. 
My dear friends, 
We live in an inter-dependent world. What happens in a far off country can affect the livelihood of workers in another place. 
The decision that may be taken in a conference roomin the UN or WTO can affect the life of a farmer in a village in India. 
The lifestyle in one part of the world affects climate and agriculture in another part of the world. 
We need each other's markets and resources. 
So, our national progress will depend on the strength and success of our international partnerships. 
We don’t have to look far to find friends and partners. 
Southeast Asia is our neighbour on land and sea. This is one of the most dynamic and peaceful regions of the world. This is a region of culture, talent, enterprise and hard work. 
India has excellent relations with all Southeast Asian countries. 
We have a strong partnership with ASEAN. I have just completed the India-ASEAN Summit. 
This is the region, where our economic relations are growing rapidly. And, it attracts the maximum number of Indian tourists. 
Friends, 
I am happy to say that Malaysia is one of our strongest partners and among our closest friends in the region. 
Malaysian companies are excellent in infrastructure. Their largest presence outside Malaysia is in India. 
Malaysian investors are present in the world’s second largest telecom market – that is India. 
Indian company, IRCON, is helping improve the rail infrastructure in Malaysia. 
There are over 150 Indian companies in Malaysia. There are over 50 Indian IT companies here. 
Malaysia is one of our biggest trading partners in ASEAN, but we need to raise it further. 
India is one of the biggest sources of tourists in Malaysia. And, 170 flights connect India and Malaysia every week. 
One of our best partnerships in traditional medicine, such as Ayurveda and Unani, is with Malaysia. 
We also work closely to keep our citizens safe. 
We have strong defence relations. Indian Air Force helped train their partners in Malaysian Air Force for two years. We exercise together in air and on land and sea Jal thal aur nabh. 
Our security agencies work together against terrorism. I want to thank Malaysian Government for our strong security cooperation. 
Terrorism is the biggest threat to the world today. It knows no boundary. It uses the name of religion to draw people to its cause. But, it is false. 
And, it kills people of all faith. We have to delink religion from terror. 
The only distinction is between those who believe in humanity and those who do not. 
I have said it before and I will say it here. The world must come together to combat the biggest challenge of our times. 
We can strengthen intelligence cooperation. We can use military force. We can make the international legal system for cooperation stronger. 
But, when I say that the world must come together, it is not just about more security cooperation. 
It also means ensuring that no country uses or promotes terrorism. There are no sanctuaries. There are no funds. There are no arms. 
But, we also have to work within our societies and with our youth. We need the support of parents, communities and religions scholars. And, we have to make sure that internet does not become a recruiting ground.. 
We have to promote peaceful relations, mutual understanding and cooperation in our region. Peace is the only foundation for a prosperous future. 
We have many common interests and challenges. So, all nations in the region, big and small, should work together to ensure that our nations remain safe, our seas secure and free for commerce, and our economies prosperous. 
Friends,
I will meet His Excellency, Prime Minister Najib tomorrow to take our relationship forward. 
India and Malaysia have much to benefit from a closer relationship. 
Whatever we choose to do, you will be a part of it. 
You will breathe more life and strength into relations between India and Malaysia. 
We will always seek your partnership in India's march to progress and in taking this special relationship forward. 
But, what we value even more, is the love and affection that binds us together. For, this is priceless and beyond any measure of value. 
You have remained connected with us despite the difficulties of distances and regulations. You are the window to our heritage and the mirror to our progress. 
You are the bridge between India and your country. 
You support families and communities in India. Many of you help a child find her way to a school and a mother access to healthcare. 
You do this without seeking an award or getting a headline. So we must do what we can for you. 
We have merged the OCI and PIO cards and we have made the visas life-long. Besides, Indian origin up to 4th generation is enough to register for OCI now. This is especially helpful for people like Malay Indians, whose ancestors came here generations ago. 
Minor children, who are foreign nationals, and foreign spouses can also get OCI status now. 
We have introduced e-visa that has made travel simpler. 
Here, in Malaysia, we have opened nine visa collection centres. There is an eMigrate portal to make it easier and safer for workers to go to certain countries. It also alerts officials about foreign employers with cases pending against them. 
We have an Indian Community Welfare Fund and a fund to help distressed Indian women abroad. 
There are times when workers from India get into difficulties here. Their welfare and security are at the top of our concerns. 
Last year, we assisted more than 8000 Indian workers to return home safely. 
In Malaysia an India-students Trust Fund was set up in 1954 to give financial assistance to Malaysian-Indian children who lacked the means for education. 
This Fund is still needed by a section of the Indian community in Malaysia. We are happy to announce grant of about 1 million US dollars in additional funds to the corpus of the Trust Fund. 
Thousands of your children go to India to become doctors. While doctors are a critical need for our societies, I hope that you will take the opportunity to get education in other areas as well. 
Malaysia and India should immediately recognize the degrees conferred by both our countries. This is something I intend to take up with Prime Minister Najib. 
In conclusion, let me say how proud we are of what you stand for, how you live in this society and what you have achieved. There are always challenges, but there are also dreams. 
And each succeeding generation has been defined more by their successes than by their challenges. 
So I ask you to continue to pursue your dreams for yourself, for Malaysia and for our two great nations. 
I want to leave with you the words of a great son of India, a great symbol of humanity, who also came from the shores of Tamil Nadu. 
The late former President APJ Abdul Kalam, one of the makers of modern India, came here in 2008. 
He wanted to be here again with you, but God had other plans. But, his life, his message and his dreams remain forever a source of inspiration. 
He said : "My message specially to the young people is 
to have courage to think differently, 
courage to invent, to travel the unexplored path, 
courage to discover the impossible, 
and to conquer the problems and succeed. 
So in your success, remember that you will have the joy and pride, not just of fellow Malaysians, but also of the 1.25 billion Indians. 
God bless you. Thank you. 
Vanakkam, Namaste
#DELIMITER#
22 11 2015, Malaysia
ASEAN
Your Excellency Prime Minister Dato' Sri Mohammad Najib,
Your Majesty,
Excellencies,
Prime Minister Najib and the people of Malaysia deserve our deepest appreciation for outstanding arrangements for the Summits in this beautiful city of Kuala Lumpur.
And, I congratulate you for your excellent review of the processes of East Asia Summit.
This is a historic summit. We applaud the ASEAN members for realizing the vision of the ASEAN Community and charting the path to 2025. 
We expect ASEAN to continue to play a leading and central role in realizing the vision of broader regional integration and cooperation. 
Excellencies, 
In this forum, we often thought of terrorism as a peripheral problem for this region. The barbaric terrorist strikes in Paris, Ankara, Beirut, Mali and on the Russian aircraft is a stark reminder that its shadow stretches across our societies and our world, both in recruitment and choice of targets. 
We must build new global resolve and new strategies for combating terrorism, without balancing it against political considerations. No country should use or supports terrorism. There is no distinction between groups. There are no sanctuaries. There are no funds. There is no access to arms. But, we also have to work within our societies and with our youth. I welcome the commitment to delink religion from terrorism and the efforts to promote human values that define every faith. 
We are also days away from the summit on climate change in Paris. There, we must not only come together to craft a balanced and concrete outcome on climate change. But we must also stand together to send a clear message that we will not retreat in the face of terror. 
Excellencies, 
Since my government entered office 18 months ago, no region has seen greater engagement from India than the Asia Pacific and the Indian Ocean Region. This reflects a long standing national consensus in India on the importance of this region for India and the world.
The world still looks to the region to address our global challenges and uncertainties. Yet, our region is also navigating its way through multiple transitions to a stable, peaceful and prosperous future. 
The East Asia Summit is the key forum for shaping the collective future of the region. 
First, East Asia Summit must continue to support the evolution of an inclusive, balanced, transparent and open regional architecture for security and cooperation. We must deepen our collective commitment to strengthen and abide by international rules and norms. 
Second, the oceans remain the pathway to our prosperity and security. India shares with ASEAN a commitment to freedom of navigation, over flight and unimpeded commerce, in accordance with accepted principles of international law, including the 1982 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea. Territorial disputes must be settled through peaceful means. 
India and Bangladesh recently settled their maritime boundary using the mechanism of UNCLOS. India hopes that all parties to the disputes in the South China Sea will abide by the Declaration on the Conduct on South China Sea and the guidelines on the implementation. Parties must also redouble efforts for early adoption of a Code of Conduct on the basis of consensus. 
Third, we need stronger commitment and closer cooperation on cyber security. We will also have to work on certain norms of behavior in this area. Outer space is also emerging as a major area of security concern. We must also continue to strengthen cooperation on non-proliferation.
India shares both land and maritime boundaries with ASEAN. India will continue to deepen bilateral security partnerships in ASEAN and with other EAS partners. We will remain active participants in the ASEAN-led security dialogue and cooperation forums. 
Four, We must also work towards early conclusion of a balanced and broad-based Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership. Trans Pacific Partnership is also a major development. These, I hope, will eventually not become competing regimes, but the foundations of an integrated economic community in the region. 
Finally, development cooperation is at the heart of the East Asia Summit. India will continue to support the efforts of our partner countries. And, we are taking the lead in establishing EAS Virtual Knowledge Portals on Disaster Management and Trauma Care & Nursing. The Nalanda University is shaping up as a world class centre of knowledge and learning. 
I share the vision of East Asia Summit focusing on strategic political, economic and security concerns in the region. Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
21 11 2015, Malaysia
ASEAN-India Summit
Your Excellency Prime Minister Dato Sri Mohammad Najib bin Tun Abdul Razak, 
Excellencies,
Mr. Prime Minister, thank you for hosting this Summit. I convey our deepest appreciation for the excellent arrangements and hospitality; and, for your leadership of ASEAN and East Asia Summit. 
Rising from a double tragedy, Malaysia has demonstrated its resilience and resolve. 
Kuala Lumpur is a symbol of Asian resurgence and of the region’s promising future. 
Congratulations on a historic milestone – the birth of the ASEAN Community. 
As always, ASEAN is providing both inspiration and leadership for regional cooperation and integration. And, from India’s perspective, ASEAN values and leadership will remain central to integration across Asia and Pacific.
Excellencies, I am delighted to return for my second ASEAN-India Summit. At the last Summit at Nay Pyi Taw, I saw the strength of our relationship and the potential of our partnership; and, even more important, the commitment and confidence that you showed for the India-ASEAN Strategic Partnership. 
We meet at a time of multiple global challenges: economic uncertainties, political turmoil and security threats. 
In this difficult moment, India and ASEAN are two bright spots of optimism. 
India is today the fastest growing major economy in the world. The growth rate is touching 7.5 %, and is likely to go higher. Our inflation is down as also our fiscal and external deficits. And, business and international confidence has increased sharply. 
The scale of transformation in India is vast; so, the size of economic opportunities in India are huge. 
And, we now have environment that is open and welcoming. This is reflected in the sharp jump in India’s ranking in the World Bank’s Ease of Doing Business. And, we will continue with our reforms with speed and boldness. 
ASEAN’s economy continues to forge ahead with dynamism and energy. 
I have no doubt that we will reinforce prosperity for our 1.9 billion people. 
Excellencies, 
I am pleased that after a temporary decline, our trade increased to about 76.5 billion U.S. dollars in 2014-15; and, so has investment in both directions. ASEAN remains the largest investment partner – both for inward and outward flows. 
Much of the potential for economic partnership remains untapped. I am confident that our trade and investment will expand, as our economies grow. 
Excellencies,
We can also draw confidence from the progress in our framework of cooperation. The entry into force of our Trade in Services and Investment Agreements in July 2015 is a major step forward. 
We also look forward to progress in negotiations for a balanced and ambitious Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement that covers goods and services as well as investments. 
Connectivity is the pathway to shared prosperity. The Trilateral Highway project is making good progress and should be completed by 2018. 
We also propose to commit a Line of Credit of 1.0 billion U.S. dollars to promote projects that support physical and digital connectivity between India and ASEAN. 
As in the past, we place special emphasis on our partnership with Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar and Vietnam. 
Our partnership with them in capacity building projects will expand. In addition, we intend to create a Project Development Fund to develop manufacturing hubs in CLMV countries. 
Excellencies, science, technology and innovation constitute a vital pillar of our cooperation and support our economic partnership. We will enlarge the ASEAN-India Science and Technology Development Fund from the current one million U.S. dollars to 5 million U.S. dollars. 
We also intend to set up an ASEAN-India Innovation Platform to facilitate commercialization of low cost technologies, technology transfer and collaborative R&D projects.
Our cooperative project in Space, to be located in Vietnam, is now making concrete progress. I assure you of its early completion. 
India also offers ASEAN our indigenously developed GPS Aided Geo Augmented Navigation or GAGAN services, which provides advanced navigation and location assistance and information facilities. 
I also propose that we cooperate in sustainable development of Ocean or Blue Economy. This will be an increasingly important driver of our future economy, and a source of food security, medicines and clean energy. India has entered into collaboration with a number of ocean states. 
Excellencies, our research and innovation efforts must cover a range of common challenges – massive urbanization and mega cities; skills for the future; food security; water; and, affordable healthcare. 
An issue of global concern is climate change. India has ambitious clean energy plans: 175 GW of additional capacity of renewable energy by 2022; and, 40% of energy through non-fossil fuel by 2030. 
Excellencies, we would also be happy to offer over 100 training slots in renewable energy in our institutions. 
I have also proposed an international solar alliance of 122 solar-rich countries, which French President Hollande and I will launch in Paris on November 30. We look forward to your participation in the launch and the alliance. 
Excellencies, 
I deeply value our collective efforts to revive the cultural pillar of our relations. An international conference on ASEAN-India Cultural Links was held in New Delhi in July. We are proposing to open an ASEAN Studies Centre in our North-Eastern Hill University in Shillong, which is our Gateway to the East. 
I am delighted that the first recipient of the Indian Council for Cultural Relations Distinguished Alumni Award instituted this year is H.E. Le Luong Minh, Secretary General of ASEAN. 
India will soon extend electronic-visa facility to all 10 ASEAN countries. 
Excellencies, 
Our future prosperity rests on the foundation of security and stability in our region and the oceans, outer space and cyber world. 
The first ASEAN-India Cyber Security Conference we hosted in January 2015 should be the springboard for greater cooperation in this area. 
India shares with ASEAN a commitment to freedom of navigation, over flight and unimpeded commerce, in accordance with accepted principles of international law, including the 1982 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea. Territorial disputes must be settled through peaceful means.
India hopes that all parties to the disputes in the South China Sea will abide by the guidelines on the implementation of the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea, and redouble efforts for early adoption of a Code of Conduct on the basis of consensus. 
We should evolve specific plans of cooperation in maritime security, counter-piracy and humanitarian and disaster relief. 
Terrorism has emerged as a major global challenge that affects us all here. We have excellent bilateral cooperation with ASEAN members. And, we should see how we can enhance our cooperation at the regional and international level, including through support for adoption of Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism. 
Excellencies, as our rapidly transforming region navigates its way through uncertain times to a peaceful and prosperous future, we look forward to ASEAN leading the way in defining the regional architecture. 
Let me conclude by thanking Your Excellencies for your presence and by reaffirming that India attaches the highest priority to this partnership. In recognition of that, we have opened a permanent mission to ASEAN in Jakarta. 
I look forward to hearing your thoughts on how we can further develop our collaborative agenda. 
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
21 11 2015, Malaysia
ASEAN businees and investment summit
Tan Sri Dato Dr Mohd Munir Abdul Majid, Chairman of the ASEAN Business Advisory Council,
Dato Ramesh Koddamal, Co-Chair of the ASEAN-India Business Council,
Business Leaders of ASEAN,
Members of the ASEAN Business Community,
Distinguished Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen.  
I am very happy to be here with you. I feel honoured to address this privileged gathering of the leaders who have transformed South East Asia into one of the most dynamic regions of the world. I congratulate you for this achievement. I also congratulate you on the creation of One ASEAN Community which you are going to sign off tomorrow.
India and ASEAN are natural partners. Our ties date back to ancient times. They continue to serve as a bridge between our countries and regions. 
Friends! I have been saying that the 21st century belongs to Asia. I say this because of the track record of the ASEAN countries. Together, ASEAN’s ten member countries form an economic powerhouse. ASEAN has emerged as one of the largest economic zones in the world. Last fifteen years have seen your rapid and yet stable growth. Your Macro-economic stability has been the main reason for growth and stability in South East Asia. With good governance, futuristic infrastructure and focus
on new age technologies, you have created excellence. 
In simple things like tourism, you have done miracles. Once again, I compliment the leadership and people of ASEAN countries for what they have achieved. 
When I analyse the Asian miracle, I find that small countries of ASEAN and a big country like China, both have done well. This shows that growth depends more on the spirit of people rather than the size of population. I have had personal relations with many leaders of this region. I have also visited a number of places a number of times. Even as Prime Minister, my engagements with the Asian leadership started as soon as I took over. I met a number of ASEAN leaders in the last Summit
too. 
My government took office nearly 18 months ago. The Indian economy faced serious challenges. A high fiscal deficit, a high current account deficit, a large number of stalled infrastructure projects and persistent inflation were among them. 
It was obvious that reforms were needed. We asked ourselves the question – Reforms for what? What is the aim of reform? Is it just to increase the measured rate of GDP growth? Or is it to bring about a transformation in society? My answer is clear: we must REFORM TO TRANSFORM. 
In short, reform is not an end in itself. Reform for me is just a way station on the long journey to the destination. The destination is the transformation of India. We have to take the fruits of development to the margins of our geography and to the bottom of our demography. We have to touch lives, while reaching for the sky. 
By almost every major economic indicator, India is doing better than when we took office 18 months ago. 
• GDP growth is up and inflation is down
• Foreign investment is up and the Current Account Deficit is down. 
• Tax revenues are up and interest rates are down. 
• The fiscal deficit is down and the rupee is stable. 
Obviously, this did not happen by accident. And the world economy is not exactly doing well. This success is the result of a series of concerted policies. We have embarked on a course of fiscal consolidation. We have entered, for the first time, into a monetary framework agreement with the Reserve Bank to curb inflation. 
Even while cutting the fiscal deficit, we have substantially increased productive public investment. This has been made possible in two ways. Firstly, we have imposed carbon taxes on fossil fuels. We have taken the bold step of de-controlling diesel prices and thereby eliminated energy subsidies, and have in fact imposed taxes on fossil fuels. We have increased the cess on coal by 300%. Globally, there is much talk of carbon taxes. We have actually acted. Secondly, we have
reduced wasteful expenditure through innovative methods including targeting subsidies to the deserving through technology. 
Overall, there is increased confidence within and outside the country. The IMF and World Bank have expressed even better hope for our economy this year and after. The Economist magazine this week stated that “India is in healthier shape than any other big emerging economy.” 
However, as I said, our aim is not mere reform, but “reform to transform”. Macro-economic stability is good. But to transform India, much more needs to be done. We have begun a series of concerted steps. These include structural and institutional reforms. 
Agriculture remains India’s mainstay in terms of providing livelihood. We have introduced a series of simple but powerful structural reforms. There was a tendency to divert subsidised fertiliser for the production of chemicals. We have found a simple but very effective solution: by neem-coating the fertiliser, it becomes unsuitable for diversion. We are now moving towards universal neem-coating. This has already saved billions of rupees of diverted farm subsidies.  
We have also introduced Soil Health Card. This tells every farmer the condition of his or her soil and then enables him to choose the right crop, best quantity and mix of inputs. 
We have launched a housing for all program, one of the most ambitious in the world. It involves building 20 million urban houses and 29.5 million rural houses, totalling nearly 50 million. While the programme will make sure no Indian is houseless, it will also generate a large amount of employment - that too, mainly for the unskilled, the semi-skilled and the poor. 
We have undertaken major improvements in the transport sector. Our major ports witnessed a 4.65% growth in traffic and an 11.2% increase in operating income, in 2014-15 despite a global contraction in trade volume. 
The pace of award of new highway works has increased from 9 km/day in 2013-14 to 23 km/day currently. These will have large multiplier effects throughout the economy. 
We were committed to restore credibility in the process of allocation of natural resources. My government has intervened with legislative and administrative measures to improve the supply of critical inputs and raw materials. They include Coal, other minerals and spectrum. The hallmark of this intervention is allocation through transparent auction. 
We started the Jan Dhan Yojana. In less than a year, we opened 190 million new bank accounts. On Social security front, we have launched innovative and attractive schemes for insurance and pension. We have also set up MUDRA Bank to fund the small traders who were unfunded so far. More than six million small traders have already availed the loans. 
While expanding the banking services, we are also taking steps to strengthen the Banking system. Credible and capable bankers have been appointed to head banks. For the first time since banks were nationalised 46 years ago, private sector professionals have been appointed in key positions. We have taken concerted action to revive stalled infrastructure projects – We have started a major revamp of the power sector. These measures will also benefit our banks. 
Let me now turn to issues of investment, which may be of more direct relevance to you. 
In a break with over 65 years of tradition, we have involved India’s States in foreign policy. The Ministry of External Affairs has been asked to work with the States. When I visited China, a state-to-state summit was also held. And states have been asked to create export promotion councils. Making the States think globally is yet another reform with potential to transform. 
Our aim is to create jobs for more than a billion young hands. To provide this, the share of manufacturing must reach around 25% in our GDP. We have launched a campaign called ‘Make in India’ and aggressively worked on the front of Ease of doing business. Reducing complicated procedures, making them available at one platform- preferably online, simplifying the forms and formats has been taken up on war footing. That is how we have jumped up by 12 ranks in the World Bank’s Ease of Doing
Business Report of 2016. Industry is realizing the benefits of these changes. Index of Industrial Production in the current year shows a distinct improvement over the previous year. We are working in all ways to make India a global manufacturing hub.  
World Class Infrastructure has remained a dream for India. Hence, our maximum focus is on building futuristic infrastructure. By exercising tight control over unproductive expenditure, we have greatly increased capital investment by the Public Sector. To further augment such investments, we are encouraging the PPP model. We are also setting up National Investment and Infrastructure Fund which will help us leverage public investments. We are also coming up with Tax Free
Infrastructure Bonds with a view to broaden the corporate bond market and to provide long term finance for infrastructure. We are eager to work with Malaysia, Singapore and other ASEAN countries in this regard. 
As a result of our initiatives, 
• The sentiments for private investment and inflow of foreign investment have turned positive. Foreign investment is up 40%.
• India has been consistently ranked as the most attractive investment destination by several global agencies and institutions. 
• India has also improved its UNCTAD ranking of investment attractiveness. Against 15th so far, now we are at 9th place. 
• India has also jumped 16 places on the World Economic Forum’s global competitive index after five years of decline in the list. 
• MOODY’s have upgraded the outlook for India. 
Campaigns like Digital India and Skill India are designed to prepare the people to take part in this process. We have witnessed exponential growth in the number of start-ups in the recent past. To tap this energy fully, we have launched the Start up India Campaign. 
We are aware of the interest of the Global investor community in the potential that India has. In recent months, this interest has gone up. Therefore, to re-vitalize the flow of investments, we have launched the second wave of structural and financial reforms. We are trying to further open up the economy and introduce an element of predictability and stability in taxation system. 
To give you some examples: 
• We have allowed and enhanced FDI levels in key sectors including Insurance, Defence and Railways. 
• Now, most of these FDI sectors have been put on automatic approval route. 
• We have also rationalised FDI policies in many sectors, including construction, plantation and medical devices. 
• We have now allowed composite caps for Foreign portfolio investors in all sectors where FDI is allowed. Earlier, portfolio investments had a separate cap. 
• We have greatly liberalised the licensing regime; to give you one example - we have taken out almost 60% of Defence items out of the licensing process. 
• We have ended retrospective taxation. 
• We have notified the regulations for the Alternative Investment Funds. 
• We have rationalized capital gains tax for Real Estate Investment Trusts. 
• We have also decided to defer the implementation of General Anti Avoidance Rules. 
• We have introduced the Goods & Services Tax Bill in Parliament. We are hopeful of rolling it out in 2016. This will create a unified system of taxation across the country. 
• We have drafted a new bankruptcy code. Formation of the Company Law Tribunal to expedite cases is on the way. 
These are just a few examples. Almost on a daily basis, we are trying to remove the bottlenecks that were affecting our growth process. Even early this month, we have taken very dynamic steps to further open up the economy for FDI. With this round of reforms, we are among the most open economies in the world.  
Going further, I want to assure you that India is committed to protect Intellectual Property Rights of all innovators. We have taken several initiatives for transparency and online processing in IP administration. A comprehensive National IPR policy is expected by the end of the year. We are moving fast to make sure that our tax regime is transparent and predictable. We are also keen to see that genuine investors and honest tax payers get quick and fair decisions on tax matters. 
Friends, India is a land of immense opportunities. To give you some examples: our fifty cities are ready for putting up Metro Rail Systems. We have to build 50 million affordable houses. The requirement of road, rail and waterways is enormous. We have decided to go for renewable energy in a big way - 175 GW. We have to do all this in a short span of time. Our democratic values and an alert judicial system ensure the safety of your investments. We have set the tone of Governance
with a long term vision and an open mind. We are particularly working to make India the easiest place to do business. 
Friends, Most of the ASEAN economies have done their bit for Asia’s resurgence. Now, it is India’s turn. And we know that our time has come. We are at a take-off stage. I invite you to come and see the winds of change in India. Winds do take time to cross the borders. That is why; I am personally here to invite you. When you come, you will get the wings of a new business environment. And once you are there, I assure you of my full co-operation. 
Thank You.
#DELIMITER#
18 11 2015, India
Global Focal Point Conference on Asset Recovery
Secretary General, INTERPOL, Mr. Jurgen Stock
My ministerial colleague Dr Jitendra Singh
Other dignitaries on the dais
Ladies and Gentlemen.
I am happy to be here today to address the delegates of the sixth Global Focal Point Conference on Asset Recovery, and the Annual Conference of CBI and State Anti-Corruption Bureaus. I also extend a warm welcome to the delegates from abroad who are attending this Conference. I hope that your visit to India is pleasant and memorable. 
I also congratulate the officers of CBI who have received medals for distinguished service today. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Governments across the world work to transform the lives of the poor and the marginalized. Corruption is one of the principal challenges to that objective. 
We in India are currently in a crucial phase of nation building. Our mission is to build a prosperous India. An India where 
• our farmers are capable; 
• our workers satisfied; 
• our women empowered; 
• and our youth self-reliant; 
This is not an impossible mission. However, to achieve this objective, it is essential to fight relentlessly against corruption. India stands committed in its fight against corruption.
My Government has taken significant steps to check corruption and the menace of black money in a short span of time. The very day that we assumed office, we constituted a Special Investigation Team under the supervision of the Supreme Court to look into the issue. We have entered into agreements with many countries for exchanging real time information on black money. The Government has signed the Inter Government Agreement with the United States to implement the Foreign Account
Tax Compliance Act. This Agreement enables Indian tax authorities to receive financial account information of Indians from foreign countries on an automatic basis. 
A comprehensive and deterrent law, the Black Money Undisclosed Foreign Income and Assets and Imposition of Tax Act has been enacted. It provides for stringent penalties and prosecution. 
We have also introduced a provision under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act for restitution of assets. This will enable millions of poor investors who have lost money in ponzi schemes to recover a part of their hard earned money.
I hope that the partnership between Stolen Asset Recovery Initiative (StAR) and Interpol will help in confiscation and recovery of stolen assets. I am sure that this conference will go a long way towards elimination of safe havens for the proceeds of corruption and help build secure exchange platforms for recovery of criminal assets. 
Our recent initiatives to curb systemic corruption such as auction of Coal Blocks and FM Radio spectrum have eliminated the element of discretion in allocation of national resources. This has brought about transparency in the system and restored faith of the citizens in Government. It has also generated substantial revenues for the government which will benefit our people. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
We are focused on providing system based and policy driven governance. A governance structure that is sensitive, transparent and accountable. Let me share an example to illustrate how corruption can be eliminated silently and efficiently by simple technology and policy based initiatives.
When we assumed office, I was informed that cooking gas cylinders were being subsidized to the tune of approximately four hundred rupees per cylinder. This subsidy was being provided to rich and poor alike. We decided that the subsidy should be credited directly into bank accounts of consumers with each account being linked to a unique Aadhaar card. This single intervention has reduced the number of registered consumers claiming gas subsidy by about fifty million. Subsequently, we
also launched a campaign for the "well off" to voluntarily give up cooking gas subsidy. The response has been very encouraging. As on date, more than 4.5 million people have given up their gas subsidy.
Friends.
One of the challenges that we must address is Governance Deficit. This includes: 
• inadequate capacity to deliver public services effectively and efficiently 
• lack of appropriate policy responses to emerging situations
• and delays in project implementation 
My Government has taken several steps to make the bureaucracy more efficient performance-oriented and accountable. The Government is committed to ensuring probity among public servants and to protect them from frivolous allegations. Equally, the Government is unsparing when it comes to punishing the corrupt. We have so far removed and ensured pension cuts of 45 senior officers of various services for unsatisfactory performance and delivery in public service. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Globalization of organized crime poses a major threat to economies throughout the world. It is a well-known fact that 'dirty money' drives out 'good money.' Organized crime can hamper investment and economic growth. It can also infiltrate or acquire control of large sectors of the economy. Illicit funding promotes organized criminal activities like drug trafficking, arms trafficking, human trafficking, and terrorism. 
The dastardly acts committed in Paris a few days ago are a grim reminder that terrorists have shown remarkable flexibility and adaptability in meeting their funding requirements. They derive funding from a variety of criminal activities which include smuggling of narcotics, bank robbery, vehicle theft, fake currency, or from state sponsors and activities in failed states.
Disrupting fund flows constrains the capabilities of terrorists and reduces their ability to execute attacks. This involves putting in place both systemic safeguards, and targeted economic sanctions based on credible counter-terrorism intelligence.
Targeting proceeds of crime is an important element in this fight against crime. Hence, there is an imperative need to focus our efforts to enhance international cooperation in the field of Asset Recovery for fighting crime, corruption and terrorism. 
Confiscation of property of offenders not only serves as punishment but also discourages commission of crime. In fact, Kautilya in his ‘Artha Shastra,’ had suggested confiscation of illegitimate income as one of the punishments for corrupt public servants. 
I am also pleased to note that the heads of State Anti-Corruption Bureaus and CBI will deliberate on the related theme of tracking proceeds of corruption. This two decade old forum must not only focus on prosecution of offenders involved in corruption but also modify their Standard Operating Procedures to more effectively target the proceeds of corruption. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Economic liberalism and globalization have drastically increased the ability to park profits of crime anywhere in the world. Today proceeds of crime can be routed through dozens of countries within seconds. By a process of layering the money-trail can be concealed. Investigation agencies are limited by national boundaries. Our Government is committed to the implementation of a uniform global standard on Automatic Exchange of Information, on a fully reciprocal basis. This will
facilitate exchange of information regarding persons who have concealed their money in offshore financial centres and tax havens. 
INTERPOL is playing an increasingly active role in asset recovery. Since 2009, Global Focal Point Forum is actively promoting the exchange of corruption data among law enforcement agencies and anti-corruption entities worldwide. In this context mention must be made of INTERPOL’s initiatives such as I-SECOM, a secure web-based encrypted channel for the exchange of sensitive data among the specialized anti-corruption community. The new INTERPOL notice could add value to
asset-tracing investigations and facilitate real time information sharing in complex cases. I appreciate the efforts of INTERPOL and its partners - World Bank and UNODC - in conceiving the idea and giving leadership to this forum that has the potential to put an end to safe havens for the corrupt.
I am told that the excellent and proactive cooperation between INTERPOL and Indian investigative agencies has resulted in tracking of many fugitive criminals and their subsequent deportation or extradition. I would like this cooperation to deepen. CBI has been effectively assisting the Indian law enforcement agencies and their foreign counterparts in overcoming the barriers that complicate the exchange of investigative information. I am also informed that CBI has been making
use of INTERPOL tools and databases for securing greater cooperation among law enforcement organizations throughout the world. It has also been consistently partnering INTERPOL Capacity Building Programmes. 
We are in the process of establishing an International Centre of Excellence in Investigation at Ghaziabad. This Centre will render world class Certified Courses on Investigation and Prosecution in specialized and emerging domains of crime including cybercrime, to the Law enforcement community of India and abroad. A Centralized Technology Vertical to focus on combating new age crimes like cybercrime, is also being planned.
There are several cases in the annals of Indian judicial history in which conviction was secured solely on the basis of forensic expert opinion. India must, therefore, have adequate facilities to be able to clear the huge backlog of forensic opinion.
The proceeds of crime and corruption are stolen assets. They do not belong to the country where they are stashed. They rightfully belong to the citizens of the country from which they have been plundered. I am well aware of the legal and procedural obstacles and differences in evidentiary standards that hinder Asset Recovery. To overcome these challenges, Police and Law Enforcement Agencies should forge formal and informal relationships. I hope this
conference provides all of you such an opportunity. I also hope that the delegates will seriously deliberate and devise proper procedures and protocols to quicken the process of tracing, identifying, restraining, confiscating, and repatriating the stolen assets.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
#DELIMITER#
15 11 2015, Turkey
g20 working session on inclusive growth
Excellencies, 
The global economic growth remains weak, with slowdown in several major economies, volatile financial markets and competitive devaluation of currencies. 
I congratulate the Turkish Presidency for coordinating efforts on Growth and Investment strategies and Employment Plans. We must all now implement our commitments. 
To stimulate growth, we need to enhance public investments, not just rely on monetary policy. 
G20’s continued call to Central Banks for careful communication on monetary policy actions will be helpful in keeping financial and currency markets stable. 
Multilateral Development Banks should enlarge their capital base to support infrastructure needs of the developing countries. New institutions such as the New Development Bank are welcome additional sources of financing. 
There is global consensus on the need to address climate change. However, multilateral institutions should not impose such difficult safeguards and conditions on loans that they become barriers to development in many countries and undermine sustainable development. 
G20 efforts must be aligned with the UN Sustainable Development Goals, adopted this year, particularly with the number one goal of elimination of all poverty by 2030. 
We welcome the G20 focus on employment of women and, on youth this year. 
Stable long term global economic growth requires not just capital flows, but also efforts to facilitate labour mobility and skill portability. 
Excellencies, 
India's economic growth is likely to grow at 7.5% this year and achieve a growth rate of 8% plus next year. We have reduced inflation and current account and fiscal deficits. 
Our programmes of inclusive development, including Financial Inclusion, universal access to basic needs by target year, Make in India, Skill India, Digital India, Industrial Corridors and Smart Cities will boost growth and, employment in India. 
This will be a source of strength for the global economy. 
Thank you!
#DELIMITER#
15 11 2015, Turkey
g20 working lunch on development and climate change
President Erdogan,
Excellencies,
I thank President Erdogan and Turkey for their warm hospitality and excellent arrangements in this beautiful setting of Anatalya.
We gather as G 20 to build a prosperous future for the world. 
Today, we meeting the tragic shadow of dreadful acts of terrorism,united by a sense shock, pain and outrage. 
We are united in condemning the barbaric attacks in Paris this week; and, the recent bombings in Ankara and Lebanon. We share the sorrow of Russia for the lost lives in the fallen aircraft in Sinai. 
These alone are a stark reminder of the dark force we face– larger than specific groups and particular targets and territories. 
It is a major global challenge of our times. It not only takes a tragic toll of lives, it also extracts a huge economic cost and threatens our way of life. 
It calls for a comprehensive global response. Combating it must be major priority for G20. 
I thank Turkey for scheduling a session on this challenge. 
Excellencies, we are herein this session to discuss two other major global challenges– development and climate change. 
This year is a milestone.The United Nations turned 70.We have adopted the Sustainable Development Goals at the United Nations. We are days away from charting a sustainable future for our planet. 
Excellencies, 
The SDGs area comprehensive set of goals that places complete elimination of poverty in the world by 2030 as its top goal. And, it creates the right balance between growth,development, human welfare and environment. 
G20 must align itself with the SDGs. In doing so,we will also stimulate faster and a more broad-based economic growth. 
Excellencies, 
India's development goals are aligned with the SDGs. 
We are promoting growth and investing in skills to create employment for our youth;increasing the pace and quality of infrastructure expansion;and, investing in making far more productive and resilient. 
We have the world's largest financial inclusion programme. And, we have definite target dates for meeting all the basic needs of our people. 
Through bold economic and governance reforms, we have achieved a growth rate of nearly 7.5% with strong prospects for a higher growth rate in the near future. 
Given our size and scale, India can become a pillar of global growth and stability. 
Excellencies, We in India don't see development and climate change as competing objectives. This is centered on the belief in the unity of humanity and Nature. 
We have ambitious plans for addressing the challenges of climate change. 
This includes additional capacity of 175 GW of renewable energy by 2022; 
cut in subsidies on fossil fuel and tax on coal; and, National Clean Energy Fund of US$3 billion to promote clean technologies. 
With our highly ambitious/Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs),India would remain in step with the world. 
We look forward to a concrete outcome in Paris within the framework of the UN Convention on Climate Change. The framework has an appropriate balance of collective action: Equity and Common but differentiated responsibility and respective capabilities. 
At G 20,we can play an effective role in supporting the multilateral goals of increasing research and development to develop affordable renewable energy. We should also ensure that finance and technology is available to meet the universal global aspiration for clean energy. 
We must meet the target of US$100 billion goal per year by 2020. 
G20 countries should increase the share of traffic on public transportation in cities by 30% by 2030. 
We should shift from "carbon credit” towards "green credit”. 
When we speak of targets, we must not only reduce the use of fossil fuel, but also moderate our life style. 
Development in harmony with nature is the goal of my proposal to launch, along with the French President Hollande, an alliance of solar-rich countries at the time of COP-21 meeting. 
Excellencies, let me conclude with a few points on development. 
We are still short in our efforts to fulfill our last year's commitment to raise our collective GDP by an additional 2% by 2018.
I propose that we consider how G20 can build support systems that focus on countries with maximum growth potential, help address specific bottlenecks there and facilitate implementation of country strategies. 
G20 must continue to focus on infrastructure, as we did In Brisbane in 2014. 
Clean energy and environment friendly infrastructure will address both development and climate change. 
Bridging the current gap in infrastructure finance in the developing countries should remain our key priority. 
I am happy with the focus on small holders and food losses in the G20 Action Plan on Agriculture. 
Remittances are a key source of income for households and support for the economy in developing countries. We should define a target date before 2030 to reduce the high costs of transferring remittances. 
I look forward to fruitful discussions and substantive outcomes. 
Thank you ! 
#DELIMITER#
15 11 2015, Turkey
G20 BRICS Leaders Summit
Excellencies, 
We can take pride in the economic initiatives of the BRICS. These will not onlystrengthen BRICS economies, but will also benefit the developing world. 
As BRICS, we must place our priorities on the agenda and activities of G20. 
One, in the area of development, G20 must place priority on
• effective implementation of Sustainable Development Agenda 2030 and ensure adequate funding for it. 
Two, in the area of global finance, G20 should focus on
• Implementation of the decisions to restructure global economic institutions. 
• Greater collaboration between multilateral and regional financial institutions. 
• Enhanced long term finance for infrastructure in developing countries. 
• Developing next generation, climate resilient infrastructure. This would also include converting waste into inputs for infrastructure. 
• lower the cost of global remittances well before 2030
• close coordination on preventing corruption and cooperation on freezing of unaccounted money hoarded abroad and its repatriation. 
Three, in the area of trade, we should focus on
• Strengthening the rule-based global trading system and ensuring that new trading blocs do not lead to division of the global trade regime. 
• speeding up the completion of the Doha Development Agenda. 
• promotinggreater mobility of skilled professionals and creating a global skill force market. 
Four, in the area of climate change,G20's priorities should include
• a successful outcome at the COP21 based on the principles of UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, including the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities. 
• Facilitate climate finance and technology transfer to developing countries. 
• enhance research and development on clean and renewable energy to increase access, efficiency and affordability of clean energy. 
• support development of next generation and climate resistant infrastructure. 
• Support the India-proposed international solar alliance. 
Five, G20 should promote stronger global action to address security challenges, including through
• comprehensive global strategy to put an end to finance, supplies and communication channels of the terrorists. 
• stopping the flow of arms and explosives to terrorist groups. 
• Creating special international legal regime to disrupt terrorist activities. 
• cooperation in preventing the use of cyber networks by terrorist groups. 
• early adoption of Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism. 
I am confident that BRICS economies will continue to be strong and stable and will remain a source of strength for the global economy. 
Excellencies, 
The Strategy for BRICS Economic Cooperation, which we endorsed in Ufa, is an important framework document. 
The Contact Group on Trade and Economic Issues and Business Council should prepare a Work Plan for implementation of the Strategy in a time-bound manner. 
Each BRICS member country should take the lead in at least two priority areas listed in the Strategy. 
It would be appropriate if the first joint meeting is held during the Russian Chairmanship. 
The joint sitting may also work on a Roadmap for Trade, Economic and Investment Cooperation till 2020. 
Excellencies, 
We hope that the New Development Bank will start its operations quickly. As I said in Ufa, its first project should be on clean energy, preferably across all BRICS countries. 
We need to create a supporting mechanism, such as a New Development Bank Institute or NDBI, which should function as bank of ideas, a storehouse of experience and a knowledge powerhouse. It can also provide inputs for the Contingency Reserve Arrangements. 
Excellencies, 
India will continue to work closely with our BRICS partners in the spirit of mutual trust, respect and transparency. 
I had shared some ideas at Ufa. These included trade fairs; agriculture research; railway research; digital initiative; energy efficient technologies; cooperation between states, cities and local bodies; promoting films and sports exchange. 
We will be building upon them and putting more new ideas on the BRICS agenda. 
We will work with you to further strengthen the institutional mechanisms of BRICS. 
I look forward to seeing you in India for the 8th Summit next year. 
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
15 11 2015, Turkey
BRICS
Your Excellency President Vladimir Putin,
Your Excellency President Xi Jinping,
Your Excellency President Jacob Zuma,
Your Excellency President Dilma Rousseff,
I thank our host, President Putin, for excellent arrangements for today's meeting and for his leadership of BRICS.
Congratulations for hosting a very successful 7th BRICS Summit.
Excellencies,
We stand united in strongly condemning the dreadful acts of terrorism in Paris. We express our deepest sympathy and support to Russia for the loss of life in Sinai. Ankara and Beirut are also reminders of terror's growing spread and impact.
The entire humanity must stand together as one against terrorism. The need for a united global effort to combat terrorism has never been more urgent. This must also be a priority for BRICS nations.
There was a time when the logic of BRICS and its lasting capacity were being questioned. We have provided proof of the relevance and value of BRICS through our actions. And, this has come at a time of huge global challenges.
The New Development Bank, the Currency Reserve Arrangement, Strategy for BRICS Economic Cooperation - these are clear evidence of our vision and our resolve. Together, we can also give shape to G20.
India attaches the highest importance to BRICS. We are honoured to assume the Chairmanship of BRICS from 1st February, 2016 and build on the great work done by other Members.
The theme of India's BRICS Chairmanship will be “Building Responsive, Inclusive and Collective Solutions” which, in short, will be 'BRICS'. It aptly describes the ethos of our group.
We are pleased that a BRICS partner, China, takes over the Presidency of G20 in December 2015. We assure China of full support during its Presidency.
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
12 11 2015, UK
Business Meeting 
Your Excellency Mr. David Cameron! 
Hon. Mr. Alan Yarrow, the Lord Mayor of London! 
Ladies and Gentlemen!
It is a great pleasure for me to be with you this evening. I must confess that there has been a delay in my coming to this great country. But, the good news is that myself and His Excellency Cameron have been in constant touch. 
We have been meeting frequently at various places and exchanging views. I remember our last meeting in New York where he rightly said that India and UK should work closely on the economic front. 
Friends! 
UK and India have known each other very well since several centuries. Our system of Governance is also based largely on the Westminster model. 
• Our institutions know to interact with each other; 
• Our people know to work with each other; 
• Our businesses know to grow with each other 
That is the reason that UK is among India’s major trading partners. UK is also the third largest foreign investor in India. And I must add- this is not one sided. India has emerged as the third largest source of FDI for UK. However, there is significant potential for India and UK to further strengthen their economic ties. 
We have to effectively leverage the mutual understanding which is there for each other. We are particularly keen to develop the sectors where UK is strong. We are working hard to create conducive conditions for this engagement. A strong Indian community here keeps pushing us for better and better integration with UK. 
Friends! Since my Government took over, we have been working relentlessly to put the economy on track. Particularly, we have worked very aggressively to make India an easy and simple place to do business. We believe that this is necessary for improving the lives of ordinary citizens in India. 
The results of our hard work are now visible. IMF Chief has recently said that India is among few bright spots in global economy today. Our growth rate in the last year was 7.3%. 
The World Bank has very recently projected our growth rate at 7.5% for this fiscal and even better in the coming years. Thus, we are fortunate to be sailing in the right direction. In the World Bank Report of 2016 on ease of doing business, India has moved up by 12 ranks at one go. No other country has made such a big improvement. 
We are also committed to take these corrections at the State, district and city level. States are moving hand-in-hand with the federal government in this task in the spirit of cooperative and competitive federalism. 
Recently, we did a ranking of our state governments on ease of doing business with the help of the World Bank Group. This has prompted the state governments into a healthy competition among themselves to ensure a business friendly eco-system.
This was for the first time that the World Bank involved itself in a sub-national exercise on ease of doing business. 
Friends! 
One of the biggest challenges in India today is to productively employ the youth. For meeting this challenge, we need to provide a huge push to manufacturing which has stagnated at around 16% of the GDP for several decades. This share must reach around 25% in the short and medium term. With this in view, we have launched the “Make in India” initiative. We are working on all fronts to make India a global manufacturing hub. 
To achieve this objective, apart from vigorous exercise for ease of doing business, we have fast tracked approvals and clearances for industry and infrastructure. The hall mark of our strategy now is Policy driven Governance. Measures like transparent auction and allocation of key natural resources like coal, spectrum, iron ore have created a level playing field for investors. 
To enhance the flow of foreign investments, we have liberalized the FDI regime allowing 100% FDI in railways. We enhanced the FDI limits to 49% in Defence and Insurance. We are also conscious of the last mile operational issues in such policies. In that spirit, early this week, we have carried out substantial changes in the FDI regime across 15 sectors. 
To give an example: now there are just no restrictions in the FDI Policy for construction sector. Similarly, very radical liberalization has been done in sectors like plantation, e-commerce and single brand retail. Moreover, we have now brought most of the FDI proposals under the automatic route. 
With this round of reforms, I can say that India is among the most open countries for Foreign Investments. 
Infrastructure is another big challenge for India. We are keen to build futuristic physical and social infrastructure. Through self-imposed discipline in financial management, we have been able to allocate more resources for infrastructure sectors. In addition, we are setting up an India Investment and Infrastructure Fund. We have targeted an annual contribution of 3.5 billion US Dollars into this fund from our own resources. We are putting in place a professional team for asset
management. 
We have also come up with the mechanism of Tax Free Infrastructure Bonds for projects in rail, road and other sectors. We will work together with the British Government, Industry and the financial markets to deepen our relationship and harness their interest in India’s infrastructure. Very soon, these bonds will become strong instruments for engagement between our financial markets. 
Friends! 
There were a number of regulatory and taxation issues which were adversely impacting on the sentiments of foreign investors. We have taken very decisive steps to remove a number of long pending concerns. 
To give you some examples: 
• We have expedited regulatory clearances including security and environmental clearance; 
• We have increased the validity period of defence industrial licences up to eighteen years from three years previously; 
• We have taken almost 60% of the defence items out of the licensing process and liberalised a number of restrictions like end-use certificate for the exports 
• We have clearly articulated that we will not resort to retrospective taxation and demonstrated this position in a number of ways 
• This includes not going for imposition of Minimum Alternate Tax on FPIs; 
• We have introduced the concept of composite sector caps for the FPIs and other foreign investors. 
• We have notified the regulations for the Alternative Investment Funds; 
• We have rationalized the capital gains tax regime for Real Estate Investment Trusts 
• We have modified the Permanent Establishment norms; 
• We have also decided to defer the implementation of the General Anti-Avoidance Rules for two years; 
• We have introduced the GST Bill in parliament; we are hopeful to roll it out in 2016; 
• We are working on a new bankruptcy code; the Company Law Tribunal is soon going to be formed. 
Friends! 
We want to make sure that our tax regime is transparent and predictable. We are also keen to see that genuine investors and honest tax payers get quick and fair decisions on tax matters. 
As a result of our initiatives, 
• the sentiments for private investment and inflow of foreign investment have turned positive. 
• FDI inflows have gone up by 40% compared with previous year’s corresponding period. 
• India has been recently ranked as the most attractive investment destinations by Ernst & Young• In a ranking of the top greenfield investment destinations in the first half of 2015, India is at number one. 
• Foreign Policy magazine of USA has ranked India as number one FDI destination. 
• In a study of 100 countries on Growth, Innovation and Leadership, India has been ranked No.1 by Frost & Sullivan. 
• India has improved its UNCTAD ranking of investment attractiveness from 15th to 9th. 
• India has also jumped 16 places on the World Economic Forum’s global competitive index. 
• MOODY’s have upgraded the rating of India as positive. 
Thus, just in eighteen months, we have successfully restored the credibility of India in the eyes of global players. Through PPP, we are encouraging private investments in areas where earlier only government used to invest. We are also divesting our stake in the public sector enterprises, to instill market discipline. We are keen to learn from your experience in structuring and implementing PPP projects. 
I am personally convinced and want to assure you that India is committed to protect Intellectual Property Rights of all innovators and entrepreneurs. We have taken several initiatives for transparency and online processing in IP administration. A comprehensive National IPR policy is being finalized. 
Friends! 
We want your active involvement in translating our dreams into reality. Our commitment and aggressiveness to achieve the goal in a faster and effective manner offers immense opportunities to British Companies. These opportunities range from building 50 million houses to setting up 100 smart cities; modernization of railway network and re-development of stations to new railway corridors; generation of 175 GW of renewable energy to transmission and distribution
networks, from National Highways and bridges, to Metro rail networks. Such a huge potential for creation of infrastructure and production of goods will not be available in any other country. More importantly, no one place on the earth can offer the potential for usage and consumption on such a massive scale. 
We are trying to harness this potential through our policies and people. The campaigns like Digital India and Skill India are designed to prepare the people to take part in this process. To tap their energy fully, we have also launched the Start up India Campaign. We have witnessed massive growth in the number of start-ups in the recent past. Some of these have already begun to challenge established global players. 
Friends!
India is on the threshold of a big IT revolution. We are encouraging it to fast-track the services to our 1.25 billion people. New Technology and renewable energy is our new Mantra. Whatever we do, we will do in a cleaner and greener way. Energy efficiency, water recycling, waste to energy, clean India and river cleaning are among those initiatives. These initiatives provide additional avenues for investment in modern technology and human resources. 
Ours is a country of the vibrant youth and a rising middle class. There is a huge domestic market in India. I have been saying that the three Ds of Democracy, Demography and Demand is our basic strength. Moreover, talented young minds in India have now begun taking risks. They are preferring to become Entrepreneurs. Thus, we have moved forward from D to E which is Entrepreneurship. 
Friends! 
Necessary conditions for take-off of the Indian economy have been created. Never before, India was so well prepared to absorb talent, technology and investment from outside. I can assure you that it will get better and better in the coming days. We will be open to welcome your ideas, innovations and enterprises. We are open to carry out necessary corrections in our policies and procedures. Given the visionary and dynamic leadership of Prime Minister Cameron and his interest in India,
I am personally eager to work with the British Government and companies. 
With these words, I welcome you to India. I assure you of my personal care in making your dreams a reality. Many of you belong to India; Many of you are in India already. But for those who are not there, I must say that: 
• At this point of time, it is wiser to be in India; 
• Further, we are making it easier to invest in India 
And 
• Believe me, we are making it even better to ‘Make in India’. 
Thank you. Thank you very much.
#DELIMITER#
12 11 2015, UK
British Parliament
Lord Speaker, 
Mr. Speaker,
Mr. Prime Minister 
I am delighted to be in London. Even in this globalised world, London is still the standard for our times. The city has embraced the world’s diversity and represents the finest in human achievements. And, I am truly honoured to speak in the British Parliament.
Mr. Speaker, thank you for opening the doors to us, here in this magnificent setting of the Royal Court. I know that the Parliament is not in Session. Prime Minister Cameron looks relaxed and relieved. 
But, I want to remind you, Mr. Prime Minister, that you owe me royalty for an election slogan. I know that you are hosting me at the Chequers this evening. But, I also know that you will understand if I am fair to both sides of the floor. Especially since British MPs of Indian Origin are evenly balanced between the Treasury and the Opposition benches. So, I also extend my good wishes to the Labour. Indeed, since these are still early days after the election, my warm congratulations
to the Members of the House. And, greetings to the eminent leaders of Britain and great friends of India present here today. 
So much of the modern history of India is linked to this building. So much history looms across our relationship. There are others who have spoken forcefully on the debts and dues of history. I will only say that many freedom fighters of India found their calling in the institutions of Britain. And, many makers of modern India, including several of my distinguished predecessors, from Jawaharlal Nehru to Dr. Manmohan Singh, passed through their doors. 
There are many things on which it is hard to tell anymore if they are British or Indian: The Jaguar or the Scotland Yard, for example. The Brooke Bond tea or my friend late Lord Ghulam Nun’s curry. And, our strongest debates are whether the Lord’s pitch swings unfairly or the wicket at Eden Gardens cracks too early. And, we love the Bhangra rap from London just as you like the English novel from India. 
On the way to this event, Prime Minister Cameron and I paid homage to Mahatma Gandhi outside the Parliament. I was reminded of a question I was asked on a tour abroad. How is it that the statue of Gandhi stands outside the British Parliament? To that question, my answer is: The British are wise enough to recognise his greatness; Indians are generous enough to share him; we are both fortunate enough to have been touched by his life and mission; and, we are both smart enough to use the
strengths of our connected histories to power the future of our relationship. 
So, I stand here today, not as a visiting Head of Government, given the honour to speak in this temple of democracy. I am here as a representative of a fellow institution and a shared tradition. 
And, tomorrow, Prime Minister and I will be at the Wembley. Even in India, every young footballer wants to bend it like Beckham. Wembley will be a celebration of one-half-million threads of life that bind us; one and half million people - proud of their heritage in India; proud of their home in Britain. 
It will be an expression of joy for all that we share: values, institutions, political system, sports, culture and art. And, it will be a recognition of our vibrant partnerships and a shared future. 
The United Kingdom is the third largest investor in India behind Singapore and Mauritius. India is the third largest source of Foreign Direct Investment projects in the United Kingdom. Indians invest more in Britain than in the rest of European Union combined. It is not because they want to save on interpretation costs, but because they find an environment that is welcoming and familiar. 
It takes an Indian icon, Tata, to run a British icon and become your nation’s largest private sector employer. 
The UK remains a preferred destination for Indian students. And, I am pleased that an Indian company is taking a thousand British students to India to skill them in Information Technology. 
We are working together in the most advanced areas of science and technology. We are finding solutions to the enduring human problems of food and health security, and seeking answers to emerging challenges like climate change. 
Our security agencies work together so that our children return home safe and our increasingly networked lives are not prey to the threats on cyber space. 
Our Armed Forces exercise with each other, so that they can stand more strongly for the values we represent. This year alone, we have had three exercises together. 
And, in the international arena, your support has made it more possible for India to take her rightful place in global institutions and regimes. And, it has helped us both advance our common interests. 
Mr. Speaker, 
Strong as our partnership is, for a relationship such as ours, we must set higher ambitions. We are two democracies; two strong economies; and, two innovative societies. 
We have the comfort of familiarity and the experience of a long partnership. Britain’s resurgence is impressive. Its influence on the future of the global economy remains strong. 
And, Mr. Speaker, India is new bright spot of hope and opportunity for the world. It is not just the universal judgment of international institutions. It is not just the logic of numbers: a nation of 1.25 billion people with 800 million under the age of 35 years. 
This optimism comes from the energy and enterprise of our youth; eager for change and confident of achieving it. It is the result of bold and sustained measures to reform our laws, policies, institutions and processes.
We are igniting the engines of our manufacturing sector; making our farms more productive and more resilient; making our services more innovative and efficient; moving with urgency on building global skills for our youth; creating a revolution in Startup enterprises; and, building the next generation infrastructure that will have a light footprint on the Earth. 
Our momentum comes not just from the growth we pursue, but from the transformation that we seek in the quality of life for every citizen. 
Much of India that we dream of still lies ahead of us: housing, power, water and sanitation for all; bank accounts and insurance for every citizen; connected and prosperous villages; and, smart and sustainable cities. These are goals with a definite date, not just a mirage of hope. 
And, inspired by Gandhiji, the change has begun with us – the way the government works. There is transparency and accountability in governance. There is boldness and speed in decisions. 
Federalism is no longer the fault line of Centre-State relations, but the definition of a new partnership of Team India. Citizens now have the ease of trust, not the burden of proof and process. Businesses find an environment that is open and easy to work in. 
In a nation connected by cell phones, Digital India is transforming the interface between Government and people. 
So, Mr. Speaker, with apologies to poet T.S. Eliot, we won’t let the shadow fall between the idea and reality. 
If you visit India, you will experience the wind of change. 
It is reflected in the surge of investments from around the world; in enhanced stability of our economy; in 190 million new bank accounts of hope and inclusion; in the increase in our growth to nearly 7.5% per year; and, in the sharp rise in our ranking on Ease of Doing Business. 
And, the motto of Sab Ka Saath, Sab Ka Vikas, is our vision of a nation, in which every citizen belongs, participates and prospers. 
It is not just a call for economic inclusion. It is also a celebration of our diversity; the creed for social harmony; and, a commitment to individual liberties and rights. 
This is the timeless ethos of our culture; this is the basis of our constitution; and, this will be the foundation of our future. 
Mr. Speaker, 
Members and Friends, 
The progress of India is the destiny of one-sixth of humanity. And, it will also mean a world more confident of its prosperity; and, more secure about its future. 
It is also natural and inevitable that our economic relations will grow by leaps and bounds. We will form unbeatable partnerships, if we combine our unique strengths and the size and scale of opportunities in India. 
We will see more investment and trade. We will open new doors in the Services sector. We will collaborate more – here and in India - in defence equipment and technology. We will work together on renewable and nuclear energy. 
We will explore the mysteries of science and harness the power of technology and innovation. We will realise the opportunities of the digital world. Our youth will learn more from - and with - each other. 
But, a relationship as rich as this, with so much promise as ours, cannot be measured only in terms of our mutual prosperity. 
Mr. Speaker, 
Ours is an age of multiple transitions in the world. We are yet to fully comprehend the future unfolding before us. As in the previous ages, it will be different from the world we know. 
So, in the uncharted waters of our uncertain times, we must together help steer a steady course for this world in the direction that mirrors the ideals we share. 
For, in that lies not just the success of our two nations, but also the promise of the world that we desire. We have the strength of our partnership and the membership of the United Nations, the Commonwealth and the G-20. 
We live in a world where instability in a distant region quickly reaches our doorsteps. We see this in the challenges of radicalization and refugees. 
The fault lines are shifting from the boundaries of nations into the web of our societies and the streets of our cities. And, terrorism and extremism are a global force that are larger than their changing names, groups, territories and targets. 
The world must speak in one voice and act in unison to combat this challenge of our times. We must adopt a Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism in the UN without delay. There should be no distinction between terrorist groups or discrimination between nations. There should be a resolve to isolate those who harbour terrorists and willingness to stand with nations that will fight them honestly. And, we need a social movement against extremism in countries where it is most
prevalent and, every effort to delink religion and terrorism. 
Oceans remain vital for our prosperity. Now, we have to also secure our cyber and outer space. Our interests are aligned across many regions. We have a shared interest in stable, prosperous and integrated South Asia, drawn together in a shared march to prosperity. 
We want an Afghanistan that is shaped by the dreams of the great Afghan people, not by irrational fears and overreaching ambitions of others. 
A peaceful, stable Indian Ocean Region is vital for global commerce and prosperity. And, the future of Asia Pacific region will have profound impact on all of us. We both have huge stakes in West Asia and the Gulf. 
And, in Africa, where, amidst many challenges, we see so many promising signs of courage, wisdom, leadership and enterprise. India has just held an Africa Summit, in which all 55 countries, and 42 leaders participated.
We must also cooperate to launch a low carbon age for a sustainable future for our planet. This is a global responsibility that we must assume in Paris later this month. 
The world has crafted a beautiful balance of collective action – common but differentiated responsibility and respective capabilities. 
Those who have the means and the know-how must help meet the universal aspiration of humanity for clean energy and a healthy environment. And, when we speak of restraint, we must not only think of curbing fossil fuels, but also moderating our lifestyles. 
We must all do our part. For India, a target of 175 GW of additional capacity in renewable energy by 2022 and reduction in emission intensity of 33-35 % by 2030 are just two of the steps of a comprehensive strategy. 
I have also proposed to launch during the COP 21 meeting an International Solar Alliance to make solar energy an integral part of our lives, even in the most unconnected villages. 
In Britain, you are more likely to use an umbrella against rain than the sun. But, my team defined the membership of the Solar Alliance in more precise terms: you have to be located within the Tropics. 
And, we are pleased that the United Kingdom qualifies! So, we look forward to an innovative Britain as a valuable partner in this endeavour. Prime Minister Cameron and I are, indeed, very pleased that cooperation on affordable and accessible clean energy is an important pillar of our relations. 
Mr. Speaker, 
This is a huge moment for our two great nations. So, we must seize our opportunities, remove the obstacles to cooperation, instill full confidence in our relations and remain sensitive to each other’s interests. 
In doing so, we will transform our strategic partnership, and we will make this relationship count as one of the leading global partnerships. Ever so often, in the call of Britain’s most famous Bard that we must seize the tide in the affairs of men, the world has sought the inspiration to act. And, so must we. 
But, in defining the purpose of our partnership, we must turn to a great son of India, whose house in London I shall dedicate to the cause of social justice on Saturday. Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, whose 125th birth anniversary we are celebrating now, was not just an architect of India’s Constitution and our parliamentary democracy. He also stood for the upliftment of the weak, the oppressed and the excluded. And, he lifted us all to a higher cause in the service of humanity; to build a
future of justice, equality, opportunity and dignity for all humans; and, peace among people. 
That is the cause to which India and the United Kingdom have dedicated themselves today. 
Thank you very much, thanks a lot.
#DELIMITER#
6 11 2015, India
Delhi Economics Conclave
My colleagues in government,
Friends and Distinguished Guests from India and abroad,
I am happy, to be here today, to address the Sixth Delhi Economics Conclave.  This is a good platform for bringing together economists, policy-makers, and thought-leaders, from India and abroad. I compliment the Ministry of Finance for organising it.
Your topic of discussion is JAM, that is, Jan Dhan Yojana,  Aadhaar  and Mobile.  This JAM vision, will serve as the bedrock of many initiatives to come.  For me,  JAM is about  Just Achieving Maximum.
Maximum value for every rupee spent
Maximum empowerment for our poor
Maximum technology penetration among the masses
But let me start by taking a brief look at the Indian economy. By almost every major economic indicator, India is doing better, than when we took office 17 months ago.
• GDP growth is up and inflation is down. 
• Foreign investment is up and the Current Account Deficit is down. 
• Revenues are up and interest rates are down. 
• The fiscal deficit is down and the rupee is stable.
Obviously, this did not happen by accident. And the world economy is not exactly doing well. This success, is the result of a series of well thought out policies. Many of the purely macro economic reforms we have undertaken, are probably well known to this audience. We have embarked on a course of fiscal consolidation. We have entered for the first time into a monetary framework agreement, with the Reserve Bank to curb inflation. Even while cutting the fiscal deficit we have
substantially increased productive public investment. This has been made possible in two ways. Firstly, we have imposed, carbon taxes on fossil fuels. We took the bold step of de-controlling diesel prices and thereby eliminated energy subsidies. We have replaced them with taxes. The coal cess has been increased by four times from Rs 50 per ton to Rs 200 per ton. Globally, there is much talk of carbon taxes but much of it is just that - TALK. We have actually acted. Secondly, we
have reduced wasteful expenditure through innovative methods like the use of technology. Some of the methods, are part of your agenda, such as using Aadhaar to target subsidies to the deserving. These are reforms that you are probably aware of. But our reforms are far broader, and far deeper, than is generally recognised.
Before I elaborate on this, I would like to raise two issues. The first is, REFORM FOR WHAT? What is the aim of reform? Is it just to increase the measured rate of GDP growth? Or is it to bring about a transformation in society? My answer is clear. We must REFORM TO TRANSFORM.
The second question is, REFORM FOR WHOM? Who is the target audience? Is our aim to impress groups of experts and score points in intellectual discussions? Or to achieve ranks in some international league table? Again, my answer is clear. Reform is that which helps all citizens, and especially the poor, achieve a better life. It is Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas.
In short, reform is not an end in itself.  Reform for me,   is just a way station on the long journey to the destination.  The destination is transformation of India.  Therefore, REFORM TO TRANSFORM.  And reforming to transform, is a marathon, not a sprint.
The reforms we have undertaken, are of many types.  For simplicity,  I will classify them  as financial,  structural  and institutional.  It will not be possible for me to cover all of them here. But I will certainly mention some of the most important.
Let me start with the financial reforms.  We talk often about interest rates and credit policy.  Changes in interest rates are debated for months.  Tons of newsprint and hours of television are spent on it.  Interest rates are no doubt very important.  But are they important to a person locked out of the banking system?  To a person who has no prospect of ever lending or borrowing  from a bank?  And if large sections of a country are in this position then how important are
interest rates?  It is for this reason that development experts have been advocating financial inclusion.  What we have done in the last 17 months is to bring one hundred and ninety million people into the banking system.  This is more than the population of most of the countries in the world.   Now these millions are part of our banking system, and words  like ‘interest rate’  have a meaning for them.
Not only have these people been brought  into the system  but they have shown that there is great strength  at the bottom  of the pyramid.  Believe it or not, accounts opened under the Jan Dhan Yojana  today have a total balance  of almost Rs. 26,000 crores  or nearly four billion dollars.  Clearly our financial inclusion reform has been transformational.  And yet this quiet revolution has hardly been noticed.  
The Jan Dhan Yojana  has also transformed  the ability of the poor  to make  and to receive  electronic payments.  Every  Jan Dhan account holder  is eligible  for a debit card.  India’s banks are also being encouraged to operate  ‘mobile ATMs’.   A mobile ATM is one  where cash can be drawn  and simple banking tasks done  through a hand held device.  Thanks to Jan Dhan Yojana and the RuPay debit card, we have also  introduced healthy competition  in the debit-credit card  space.
This has traditionally been dominated by a few international players.  Even one year ago, there were hardly any indigenous card brands in the market.  Today, 36 % of debit cards  in India  are Ru-Pay cards.
Financial inclusion is not just about opening bank accounts or enabling electronic payments.  I firmly believe, that India has tremendous entrepreneurial energy.  This needs to be harnessed so that we become a nation of job-creators, rather than job seekers.  When we took office, we found that 58 million non-corporate enterprises provided one 128 million jobs.  60% of them were in rural areas.  Over 40% were owned by people from the Backward Classes  and 15% by Scheduled
Castes and Tribes.  But bank credit accounted for  a tiny share  of their financing.  Most of them never get any bank credit.  In other words   the most  employment-intensive  sector  of the economy  gets the least credit!  While Jan Dhan Yojana  was to bring  banking to the unbanked  the second reform  was to bring  funding to the unfunded.  We are creating  a new  financing and regulatory architecture  under the  Micro-Units  Development and Refinance  Agency scheme  popularly known  as
MUDRA.  Already  under the Pradhan Mantri Mudra Yojana  banks have provided  More than six million loans  to small businesses  for a total value  of  nearly Rs 38,000 crores  or six billion dollars.  If one conservatively estimates  that each loan  creates 2 jobs  we have laid  the foundation  for 12 million new jobs.  Even Rs Two Hundred Thousand crores  invested in the corporate sector  would not produce  this many jobs.  We have now  launched a programme  where each branch  of
each bank  that is  a total  of 125,000 bank branches  will assist  one Dalit or a Scheduled Tribe person and one woman  in starting a business.  We are also creating an environment  that fosters  innovation  and start-ups  through  the Atal Innovation Mission  and the  Self Employment  and Talent Utilisation programme.  
Another financial reform is the provision  of a safety net  through new  social security schemes.  We have introduced three non-subsidised  but low cost schemes covering accident insurance  life insurance  and pensions. Because of their massive coverage the premia are low.  There are now  over 120 million subscribers.
For many of these reforms to be successful we need a strong banking system.  We inherited a system where cronyism and corruption were believed to be rampant   in banking decisions  and in appointments  to public sector banks.  After the first ever retreat of a Prime Minister with bankers, known as the Gyan Sangam, we have moved decisively to change this.  Major steps have been taken to improve efficiency, including clear performance measures and accountability mechanisms.  We have
made a commitment to ensuring adequate capital.
But more than that there have been very powerful  non-financial steps.  Interference   in banking decisions has ended.  A new process for appointments  is being put in place  under the Bank Boards Bureau.  Credible and capable bankers have been appointed  to head banks.  For the first time since banks were nationalised  46 years ago  private sector professionals  have been appointed  in key positions.  This is a major reform.
There is a whole eco-system focused on  alleviating poverty.  Perhaps this can be called  the ‘poverty alleviation industry’.  Obviously   the intentions are good.  Well designed schemes and subsidies do have an important place.  But empowering the poor is far more effective than empowering the poverty alleviation industry.  Our financial reforms empower the poor to fight poverty themselves.   I can take the analogy of a house.  The foundation and basic structure occupies some
of the costs. Then come the fixtures, fittings and furniture.  If the foundation and structure are weak  any investment  in nice fittings  or attractive floor tiles  or beautiful curtains is unlikely to last long.  So also, empowering the poor through financial inclusion and social security will provide  a more stable and lasting solution.
Let me now turn to structural reforms in various sectors.  
Agriculture remains India’s mainstay in terms of providing livelihood.   We have introduced a series of reforms.  There was a tendency to divert subsidised fertiliser for the production of chemicals.  A simple but very effective solution is neem-coating of fertiliser which makes it unsuitable for diversion.  This had been tried on a small scale earlier.   We are now moving towards universal neem-coating of urea.  This has already saved crores of rupees of diverted farm subsidies.
It is an example of how simple reforms can be very effective.
We have introduced a Soil Health Card nationally which tells every farmer the condition of his or her soil.  It enables the farmer to choose the right quantity and mix of inputs.  This greatly reduces wastage of inputs and increases crop yield besides protecting the soil.  By reducing unnecessary chemical inputs, it is also good for health of consumers.  It enables farmers to choose the best crop for their soil.  Many farmers have been unaware that their land is actually more suited
for a different crop.  In economic terms, it is a win-win-win-win.   It reduces costs, increases yields,  improves the environment  and protects the health  of consumers.  140 million soil health cards will be issued, requiring a collection  of over twenty-five million soil samples.  They will be tested through a nationwide network of  nearly 1500 laboratories.  About four million samples have already been collected.  This too is a reform to transform.
	We have launched a housing for all program - one of the most ambitious in the world.  It involves building twenty million urban houses and thirty million rural houses, totalling nearly fifty million.  The programme will make sure no Indian is houseless.  It will also generate a large amount of employment mainly for the unskilled the semi-skilled  and the poor.  This multi-pronged program is also a transformative reform.
	Much has been said  and written  about India’s labour markets.  We have already  undertaken some important steps.  Many workers  in the organised sector  have suffered  when changing jobs  by being unable to access  provident fund  and other benefits.  The benefits  accrued  under one employer  become difficult  to account for  under another employer.  We have introduced  a Universal Account Number  which will remain  with an employee  even when he changes jobs.  This  greatly improves  labour mobility  and makes life easier  for employers and employees.
We have gone  a step further  We have started  empowering  the unorganised sector employees  by giving them  a Universal Identity Number  and providing  certain minimum  social security benefits  to them.  Over a period of years,  this will have  a major impact  on the quality of employment  in India.
Before becoming Prime Minister, I had received  many inputs  about the reforms  needed in India  from many economic experts.  However,  none of them  touched on the issue  of cleanliness and sanitation.  Sanitation has languished  for years  as a poor cousin  of health  or of drinking water supply.  It has often  been viewed as a question  of budgets and projects  and expenditure.  Yet,  you will all agree  that poor sanitation  and lack of cleanliness  is much more  than an
issue  of health.  It touches upon  every aspect  of our well-being.  It is  of particular importance  to women.  Our Swacch Bharat  or Clean India campaign  will impact  not only health and sanitation   but also uplift  the status and security of women  and above all  create a powerful sense  of well-being.  If this reform succeeds, as I am confident it will,  India would have been transformed.
We have undertaken  major managerial improvements  in the transport sector.  Our major ports  have seen a 5% growth  in traffic  and an 11% increase  in operating income  in 2014-15  despite a global contraction  in trade volume.  The Shipping Corporation of India  had been making losses  continuously for several years  and had a loss  of Rs. 275 crores  in 2013-14.  In 2014-15  it earned a profit  of Rs 201 crores   a turnaround  of nearly Rs 500 crores  in one year.  The pace of
award  of new highway works  has increased  from 5.2 km per day  in 2012-13  and 8.7 km per day  in 2013-14  to 23.4 km per day  currently.  These managerial reforms  in the working  of the public sector  will have large multiplier effects  throughout the economy.
Another measure we have taken  is to identify  what can be called  ‘dead money’  and use it productively.  The best example is gold.  India is well known for its cultural affinity for gold.  As economists you will probably understand that this so-called cultural affinity  has a strong economic logic.  India has often witnessed high inflation.  Gold  is an excellent hedge  against inflation  and is a highly portable  store of value.  Its portability and usability,  also make it  a source
of empowerment of women  who traditionally  are the main owners of gold jewellery.  However, this micro-economic virtue,  can become a macro-economic vice.  It implies a high level of gold imports.  We have just launched a series of gold-related schemes.  These will provide Indians with the inflation protection  of gold  along with a modest interest  without actually holding it.  If the scheme reaches its potential, it will help meet  the rational expectations  of the public  while
moderating imports.  Surely, this too is an important reform  with potential to transform.
Let me now turn  to institutional  and governance reforms.
For years,  the Planning Commission  was widely criticised.  It was generally seen as a cumbersome  centralising force  which imposed  central will  on the states.  It is another matter that some of its  strongest critics  suddenly developed  a nostalgic admiration  for the institution  they had hated till the previous day.  After coming to power we created a new institution, the National Institution for Transforming India, or NITI.  My vision of NITI  is very different  from the
Planning Commission.  It is to be  a collaborative forum  for ideas and action  where States  are full partners  and where Centre and States  meet in a spirit  of co-operative federalism.  Perhaps some people thought this was merely a slogan. But we already have  concrete examples of its transformative power.  Let me explain.
As you all know, the 14th Finance Commission  recommended  that states be given  an enhanced share  of Central revenues  as automatic devolution.  Despite  some internal advice to the contrary,  I decided  to accept the recommendation.  This has created  a need to restructure  Centrally Sponsored Schemes.  Ever since the First Five Year Plan  in 1952,  such decisions were taken  unilaterally by the Centre.  We did something very different.  The task of fixing  the sharing
pattern  of Central schemes  was entrusted  not to a group of Central ministers  but to a Sub-Group of Chief Ministers in NITI.  And I am delighted  to say, that  in a fine example of co-operative federalism at its best,  the Chief Ministers  have unanimously agreed  on a set of recommendations.  This  is despite the fact  that this is a very complex issue,  and that  they come from many different political parties.   I received their report, on 27th October.   The main recommendation
on the sharing pattern  was accepted the very same day  and written instructions  were issued  the very next day.  On many other issues too, the Chief Ministers are taking the lead in setting the national agenda.  By reforming the institution, we have transformed the relationship.
Our work  on ‘Make in India’  and ‘Ease of Doing Business’  is of course  well known.  Our push  to ‘Make in India’  must be viewed  in the context of the very slow growth  in world trade.   The growth rate of trade  exceeded GDP growth  from 1983 to 2008.   Since then,  trade has been growing  more slowly than GDP. Therefore,  producing for domestic consumption  is important for growth.
You are all probably aware,  that India  has substantially improved  its ranking   in the World Bank’s  Doing Business survey.  But a new feature,  is the very healthy and constructive competition  among states.  You would be surprised to know, that among the top few states  are Jharkhand,  Chattisgarh  and Odisha.   This is an example of constructive competitive federalism.
In a break with over sixty-five years of tradition  we have involved states  even in foreign policy.  The Ministry of External Affairs   has been asked  to work with the States.  When I visited China,  a state-to-state summit  was also held.  And states  have been asked  to create export promotion councils.  Making the States  think globally  is yet another reform  with potential to transform.
I firmly believe  that India’s people  are far more mature  and far more public-spirited  than arm-chair critics and experts  give them credit for.  An important governance issue   is the mutual trust   between citizens  and the state.  We made a beginning  in trusting the citizens  by abolishing  many requirements  for ‘attestation’ of signatures.   For example,  the Department of Higher Education,   has permitted self attestation  by students   of documents used for admission    in
various academic courses.  We also ended the requirement  to visit government offices  for life certification for pensioners  by introducing online biometric identification.  Economists have traditionally believed    that people act in their self interest.    But India has a long tradition of voluntarism.    We introduced    the Give-it-up Campaign seeking the cooperation  of the public  in voluntarily giving up  cooking gas subsidies.   We promised them   that for every
connection given up one poor family  currently without gas  would be given a connection. This will enable us to liberate many poor women   from the health hazards  of using firewood  including respiratory illness.  The response has been tremendous. Within a few months   over four million Indians have given up their cooking gas subsidies.   Most of them are not rich households and belong to the lower middle class.  If any of you in this room  still have a subsidised connection
let me appeal to you  to join them.   
This brings me to an achievement that I think even our worst critics   do not dispute. This is the change in levels of corruption.   For many years, economists  and other experts have held corruption to be one of the main constraints on the growth of any developing economy.    We have taken decisive steps  to curb corruption.  I have already referred    to what has been done  in public sector banks. Another major reform   is well known.  This is the removal of discretion in
allocation of key resources.  Our auctions of coal spectrum and FM radio licences have produced major additional revenues. In the case of coal the major beneficiaries are some of India’s poorest states, who will now have much more resources for development. Interviews for lower level government jobs have widely been seen, as a source of corruption.  We have recently abolished the system of interviews for lower level posts in government. We will rely on transparent written
examination results to decide who will be selected. Our campaign against tax evasion and money laundering is also well known.  Rs. 6500 crores has been assessed before the new Black Money Act was implemented.  Additionally, over Rs 4000 crores   has been declared  under the new Act.   Thus over Rs 10,500 crores of black money from abroad   has been detected and assessed.  If we can sustain this improvement in integrity and transparency what can be  a more transformative reform?
We are also taking several steps to serve the honest taxpayer better.   Electronic filing of returns now covers 85% of all tax returns.   Earlier, electronic returns had to be followed  by a paper verification  which used to take weeks  to be processed.  This year, we have introduced e-verification using Aadhaar  and over four million taxpayers  made use of this facility.  For them, the entire process was simple, electronic  and completed instantly with no paper at all.  This year, 91% of
electronic returns were processed within ninety days as compared to 46% last year. Nearly 90% of refunds were issued within 90 days.   I have asked the Income Tax Department to move to a system where not only returns but also scrutiny is done without having to go to the office.  Queries could be raised and answered online or by Email.   There should be a visible electronic trail of what is pending with whom, where, and for how long.  This is being piloted in five big cities.
I have also instructed that the performance appraisal system, for Income Tax Officers be changed.  The appraisal should reflect, whether or not the officer’s orders and assessments have been upheld on appeal.   This will deter corruption and also motivate officers to pass correct orders.   When fully implemented, these changes, namely online scrutiny,  and changes in performance appraisal have transformative potential.
This is a distinguished gathering. You have many interesting and thought provoking sessions ahead.  My appeal to all of you, is to think beyond conventional remedies. We should not limit our idea of reforms to a few standard notions.   Our idea of reforms should be inclusive and broad-based.  The goal of reforms is not better headlines in the pink papers, but better lives for our people.   I am sure you with your knowledge will come up with even better ideas.   I look forward to
hearing from you of more  ‘reforms to transform’  which will make life better  for the whole of India.  Then not only we in India  but the whole world  will benefit.  
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
6 10 2015, India
Business Forum - Indo german, Bangalore
Your Excellency Dr. Angela Merkel! 
It is a great pleasure for me to join you in Bengaluru. Welcome to this Indo German Summit. I fondly recall my visit to the city of Hannover and Hannover Messe in April.
15 States, a number of CEOs and hundreds of companies from India, had participated. The exposure to Hannover Messe will go a long way in shaping our vision and strategy of manufacturing. This is particularly important at a time when we are on the path of making India a global manufacturing hub.
Dr. Merkel and Friends! 
There is tremendous potential in India-Germany economic collaboration. Germany ranks 7th among foreign investor countries in India. About 600 Indo-German Joint ventures are already operating in India. However, as of now, our economic partnership remains below our full potential. We are particularly keen to develop the sectors where Germany is strong. We are working hard to create conducive conditions for the same.
Friends! At a time of global slowdown, India represents a bright spot for investments. We are fortunate to be sailing in the right direction. The recent data on global economic activity reinforces this assertion. However, we cannot afford to be complacent. We are committed to doing everything possible to convert these analyses into reality.
With a very open and global mindset, we have worked aggressively in the last fifteen months to make India an easy place to do business. We are committed to creating favorable conditions for business and industry because we believe that they are necessary for improving the lives of ordinary citizens in India. A recent study conducted with the help of the World Bank Group has brought out the urgency among our provincial governments on ease of doing business. They are moving
hand-in-hand with the federal government in this direction in a true spirit of cooperative and competitive federalism. In fact the provincial governments have now entered into a healthy competition among themselves to ensure that a transparent, predictable and user friendly regulatory mechanism is quickly put in place.
Friends! One of the biggest challenges in India today is to productively employ our youth. For meeting this challenge, we need to provide a huge push to manufacturing which has stagnated at around 16% of the GDP for several decades in India. This percentage must reach around 25 in the short and medium term. With this in view, we have launched the “Make in India” initiative.
To make it a success, apart from vigorous implementation of measures for ease of doing business, we have fast tracked approvals and clearances for industry and infrastructure. Transparent auction and allocation of spectrum and of key natural resources like coal, iron ore and other minerals in the last 15 months have created a level playing field for investors. 
We are aware that our domestic financial resources are not sufficient to meet our needs. Therefore, to enhance the flow of foreign investments, we have liberalized the FDI regime allowing 100% FDI in railways and enhancing the FDI limit to 49% in Defence and Insurance. We have also refined our FDI Policy for construction and medical devices. We have rationalized a number of other FDI related policy issues including bringing in the concept of composite sector caps for the
FPIs and other investors. 
We are keen to build futuristic physical and social infrastructure. Through self-imposed discipline in the management of our financial resources, we have been able to allocate more resources for infrastructure sectors. In addition, we are setting up an India Investment and Infrastructure Fund. We have targeted an annual flow of Rs 20,000 Crore (which is approximately 2.7 billion euros) into this fund from our own resources. We are putting in place a professional team for asset
management. 
We have also come up with the mechanism of Tax Free Infrastructure Bonds for projects in rail, road and irrigation sectors. 
There were a number of regulatory and taxation issues which were adversely impacting on the sentiments of foreign investors. We have taken very decisive steps to remove a number of long pending concerns of investors.
To give you some examples: 
• We have expedited regulatory clearances including security and environmental clearance; 
• Across the board, we have increased the validity period of Industrial Licences; 
• We have de-licenced a number of defence items and liberalised a number of restrictions like end-use certificate
• We have increased the validity period of defence industrial licences up to eighteen years from three years; 
• We have clearly articulated that we will not resort to retrospective taxation and reinforced this position by not going for imposition of Minimum Alternate Tax on FPIs; 
• We have notified the regulations for the Alternative Investment Funds allowing foreign investments in such funds; 
• We have rationalized the capital gains tax regime for Real Estate Investment Trusts • We have modified the Permanent Establishment norms; 
• We have also decided to defer the implementation of the General Anti-Avoidance Rules for two years; 
• We have introduced the GST Bill in parliament; we are hopeful to roll it out in 2016; 
• We are working on a new bankruptcy code; the Company Law Tribunal is soon going to be formed. 
We want to make sure that our tax regime is transparent and predictable. We are also keen to see that genuine investors and honest tax payers get quick and fair decisions on tax matters. 
As a result of our initiatives, the sentiments for private investment and inflow of foreign investment have turned positive. The growth rate of our GDP is above 7%. FDI inflows have gone up by 40% compared with previous year’s corresponding period.
Many international financial institutions including the World Bank, IMF, OECD and others are predicting even faster growth in the coming years. MOODY’s have upgraded the rating of India as positive. 
India has improved its UNCTAD ranking of investment attractiveness. Against 15th so far, now we are at 9th place. India has also jumped 16 places on the World Economic Forum’s global competitive index after five years of decline in the list. Similarly, in a ranking of the top global destinations for greenfield investment in the first half of 2015, India is at number one. Foreign Policy magazine of USA has ranked India as number one FDI destination. 
Thus, just in Fifteen Months, we have successfully restored the credibility of India in the eyes of global players. 
I have always said that government has no business to do business. Hence, through PPP or otherwise, we are encouraging private investments in areas where earlier only government used to invest. We are also divesting our stake in the public sector enterprises, to instill market discipline. 
Friends. I want to assure you that India is committed to protecting Intellectual Property Rights of all innovators and entrepreneurs. We have taken several initiatives for transparency and online processing in IP administration. A comprehensive National IPR policy is being finalized. Last week I myself reviewed the situation. I can say that this will be a progressive, and forward looking policy. 
Friends! We want your active involvement in translating our dreams into reality. Our commitment and aggressiveness to achieve the goal in a faster and effective manner offers immense opportunities to German Companies. These opportunities range from building 50 million houses to setting up 100 smart cities; modernization of our railway network and stations to setting up of new railway corridors; generation of 175 GW of renewable energy to construction of transmission and
distribution networks, National Highways, bridges, and Metro rails. Such a huge potential for creation and production will not be available in any one country. More importantly, no one place on the earth can offer the potential for consumption on such a massive scale.
We are trying to power this potential through our campaigns like Digital India and Skill India. To tap the energy fully, we have launched the Start up India Campaign. 
I thank NASSCOM for becoming our active partner in this journey. Recently, we tried to ignite this energy through an interface of our youth with the eco-system of Silicon Valley. India, in fact, is on the threshold of a big IT revolution. We are at the tipping point where technology is going to be leveraged to meet the aspirations of our 1.25 billion citizens. These initiatives provide additional avenues for investment in modern technology and human resources. 
Friends! Ours is a country of the young and it is going to remain so for many more years. There is a huge domestic market in India. Unlike a decade ago, talented young minds in India are no longer looking merely for high paying jobs. Instead, they have now begun taking risks and preferring to become entrepreneurs. We have witnessed exponential growth in the number of start-ups in the recent past. Some of these have begun to challenge established global players. 
To conclude, I can assure you that we will be open to welcome your ideas, innovations and enterprises. I had said in Hannover and I am saying it again, that we are also open to carry out necessary corrections in our policies and procedures. I can say that, never before, India was so well prepared to absorb talent, technology and investment from outside. 
To our understanding, the necessary conditions to propel the Indian economy to a high growth trajectory do exist today. I am eagerly looking forward to working with you. 
While in Bengaluru, I must add that It is the software of India that will move the hardware across the world; It is the talent of India that will master the technology; It is the market of India that will motivate manufacturing. 
Therefore, it makes strong business sense to be in India. It makes even better business sense to Make in India. 
Thank you very much!
#DELIMITER#
5 10 2015, India
Press meeting with Angela Markel
Chancellor Merkel,
Members of German delegation,
My colleagues,
Members of the media,
It is a great pleasure to welcome Chancellor Angela Merkel and her eminent delegation to India.
On behalf of the people of India, I warmly congratulate Germany on the 25th anniversary of German reunification. At this important milestone, you can look back with pride on what you have accomplished at home and abroad. Chancellor Merkel, your leadership is a source of confidence and reassurance at a difficult moment for Europe and the world.
You have chosen to visit India despite many preoccupations in your region. The strength of your delegation reflects the importance you attach to relations with India and the seriousness with which you approach the Inter Governmental Consultations. Your commitment holds the key to progress in our relations. So, thank you very much!
The mechanism of Inter-Governmental Consultation is certainly unique. And, it has brought about all round growth in our relations. In addition, in the course of the past year, our two sides have deepened our engagement. We see Germany as a natural partner in achieving our vision of India’s economic transformation. German strengths and India’s priorities are aligned. And, so is our mutual goodwill. 
Our focus tends to be on economic ties. But, I believe that in a world of seamless challenges and opportunities, India and Germany can also be strong partners in advancing a more human, peaceful, just and sustainable future for the world. We have a rich history of engagement. We share values, comfort in our relations and a sense of responsibility to the world.
Today, we have met for around three hours. We will continue our dialogue here and in Bengaluru tomorrow. I was very pleased with our discussions and the broad range of outcomes.
German response to our development agenda is very encouraging. We can look forward with confidence to increased investment, trade and technology partnerships in manufacturing, infrastructure and skill development. German engineering and Indian IT skills can create the next generation industry that will be more efficient, economical and environment friendly.
1600 German companies in India, and growing in number, will be strong partners in creating a global work force in India.
German cooperation and assistance in areas like smart cities, Clean Ganga and waste management have taken a concrete shape. So, has our cooperation in education, from engineering to humanities.
I admire German leadership in clean energy and commitment to combating climate change. This is an area where we have convergence of views, and rapidly growing cooperation. We have agreed on India Germany Climate and Renewable Energy Alliance with a long term vision and a comprehensive agenda of combating climate change. I place great value on Germany’s assistance of over one billion Euros for India’s Green Energy Corridor and a new assistance package of over a billion Euros for
solar projects in India. We also intend to deepen research cooperation in clean and renewable energy, and energy efficiency. To contain temperature rise we must also change our temperament.
We look forward to a concrete outcome at COP21 in Paris that strengthens the commitment and the ability of the world, especially of poor and vulnerable countries, to transition to a more sustainable growth path.
Our partnership will also grow in areas like defence manufacturing, trade in advanced technology, intelligence, and countering terrorismand radicalism. These are important security dimensions of our expanding relationship. 
I welcome Germany’s strong support for India’s membership of the international export control regimes. As we discussed in the G4 Summit in New York, Chancellor and I are committed to pursue reforms of the United Nations, especially the Security Council. 
We have a common perspective on this region; the turbulence in West Asia; Europe’s challenges; and, shaping a peaceful and stable Asia Pacific and Indian Ocean Region. I especially thanked her for Germany’s invaluable support for peace, security and development in Afghanistan.
Finally, a very special word of gratitude to Chancellor Merkel and the people of Germany for the return of the 10th century statue of Durga in her Mahishasurmardini avatar from Jammu and Kashmir. She is a symbol of the victory of good over evil.
This also suggests that in this age of transitions and turmoil, India-Germany partnership will be a force of good for the world.
It is a saying common to both our cultures that friendship is a plant that needs to be watered. I am confident that after this extraordinary session, the tree of our friendship will blossom.
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
28 9 2015, USA
UN Peacekeeping Summit
President Barack Obama, 
Secretary General Ban Ki-moon, 
Excellencies, 
The foundations of the United Nations were laid by the brave soldiers on the battlefields of Second World War. By 1945, they included 2.5 million men of the Indian Army, the largest volunteer force in history. More than 24000 lost their lives and nearly half of that went missing. 
The legacy of that sacrifice is shared by three countries present here. They remain today among the largest contributors to the United Nations Peacekeeping Operations.
Over 180,000 Indian troops have participated in UN peacekeeping missions - more than from any other country. India has participated in 48 of the 69 UN peacekeeping missions so far. 161 Indian peacekeepers have made the supreme sacrifice while serving in UN missions. 
India was the first country to contribute a Female Formed Police Unit to UN Mission in Liberia. 
India has been providing training to peacekeeping officers from a large number of countries. Till date, we have trained nearly 800 officers from 82 countries. 
I thank President Obama for hosting this Summit on Peacekeeping. It is timely not just because of the 70th anniversary of the organization. It is also because the security environment is changing, the demands on peacekeeping are growing and the resources are harder to find. 
Today's peacekeepers are called upon not only to maintain peace and security, but also address a range of complex challenges. 
Mandates are ambitious; but, resources are often inadequate. Mandates sometimes make peacekeepers party to conflicts, putting at risk their lives and success of their missions. 
The problems arise to a large extent because Troop Contributing Countries do not have a role in the decision-making process. They do not have adequate representation in senior management and as Force Commanders. 
Peacekeeping missions should be deployed prudently, with full recognition of their limitations and in support of political solutions.
We are pleased that the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations has recognized these issues. We thank UN Secretary General for his prompt report on the Panel’s recommendations. We look forward to their early consideration. 
India’s commitment to UN Peacekeeping remains strong and will grow. 
We have announced new intended contributions that to the UN Peacekeeping Operations. 
These include additional battalion of up to 850 troops in existing or new operations; additional 03 Police units with higher representation of female peacekeepers; commitment to provide critical enablers; deployment of technical personnel in UN missions; and, additional training for peacekeepers at our facilities in India and in the field. 
In conclusion, l wish to emphasise that the success of UN peacekeeping ultimately depends not on the weapons that the soldiers carry, but on the moral force that decisions of the UN Security Council command. 
We must complete the long-pending task of reforms within a fixed time frame of the UN Security Council to preserve the relevance and effectiveness of the UN. 
I would like to pay homage to the peacekeepers who have laid down their lives in defending the highest ideals of the United Nations. It would be most fitting if the proposed memorial wall to the fallen peacekeepers is created quickly. India stands ready to contribute, including financially, to this objective.
#DELIMITER#
28 9 2015, US
Joint Press statement with president obama
President Obama, 
Members of the media, 
It is a great pleasure to meet President Obama in New York. Thank you for hosting this meeting. 
I deeply value your friendship and your vision and commitment for the relationship between our two countries. 
We have achieved significant progress in our bilateral cooperation and international partnership. 
I was in Silicon Valley over the weekend. I experienced the strength of American innovation and enterprise that provide the foundation of American success. 
I also saw the driving force of our relationship - youth, technology and innovation; and, the natural partnerships of Indian and Americans in advancing human progress. 
California also reminds us that India and the United States are part of the dynamic Asia Pacific Region. 
Amid the problems that the world faces today and the global challenges that we see ahead, our partnership is of great significance for us and our world. 
We can apply innovation and technology for achieving Sustainable Development Goals, including combating climate change and conserving Nature. 
President and I share an uncompromising commitment on climate change, without affecting our ability to meet the development aspirations of humanity. We have both set ambitious national agendas. 
In India, our measures include not just a plan to add 175 GW of renewable energy by 2022, but a development strategy that will enable us to transition to a more sustainable energy mix. This is an exercise we are undertaking in the spirit of our culture and tradition, but also because of our commitment to the future of this planet. 
Our extraordinary bilateral partnership in the energy sector focuses on clean and renewable energy and energy efficiency. 
I also thank President Obama for his positive response to my call for a global public partnership for developing affordable clean energy sources that will enable faster adoption of clean energy across the world. 
We should work together to advance that goal. And, it is equally important to develop mechanisms to ensure that the affordable also become accessible to those who need it the most. 
We look forward to comprehensive and concrete outcome in Paris with a positive agenda on combating climate change, which also focuses on access to finance and technology for the developing world, especially the poor countries and small island states.
I thanked President Obama for U.S. support for India's permanent membership of a reformed UN Security Council. I also sought U.S. support to complete the reform process within a fixed time frame. 
I expressed our appreciation for continued U.S. support for India's membership of the international export control regimes within our targeted time frame. 
Our partnership addresses a broad range of strategic and security concerns. 
Our defence cooperation, including defence trade and training, is expanding. As existing terrorism threats grow and new ones emerge, we have resolved to further deepen cooperation on counter terrorism and radicalism. We have just had a successful cyber security dialogue. 
We have agreed to further strengthen our consultation and cooperation on helping the Afghan people combat terrorism and build a peaceful, stable and prosperous future of their nation. 
I welcomed the progress in giving shape to our Joint Strategic Vision on Asia, Pacific and Indian Ocean Regions as also our joint engagement with regional partners like Japan. This will also strengthen our maritime security cooperation. 
To further increase our strategic engagement in the region, I look forward to working with the U.S. for India’s early membership of Asian Pacific Economic Community. 
Our economic partnership is a key driver of our relationship. I have had excellent meetings with business leaders in New York and San Jose. I am very pleased with their confidence in India and value their constructive feedback and suggestions. 
We will also continue to work towards a stronger bilateral framework of economic cooperation, including the Bilateral Investment Treaty and Totalisation Agreement. 
This meeting and my engagements in the U.S. demonstrate the extraordinary depth and diversity of our relationship. 
Our meeting today was very productive in advancing some of our immediate priorities as also our broader strategic partnership. 
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
27 9 2015, USA
India US Startup connect
Thank you, every one! 
Let's give a big hand to our outstanding young exhibitors today. 
Thank you for coming out in strength on a Sunday. 
Reid Hoffman, your LinkedIn is a great product. And, you are an inspiration to many here and in India. 
Thank you, Mohan, Venkie, Ambassador. 
It is a great pleasure to be here. For me, this is a special event, because the idea of startups is close to my heart. 
You are likely to wonder why, because governments and national capitals are supposed to stop or slow things down, not start them up. 
I know this was once the view of Washington from Silicon Valley; and, this is exactly how tech specialists in Bengaluru thought about New Delhi. 
And, I know that many of you think that the only problems that have not been solved are the ones for which you have not written the apps yet. 
When I shifted to Delhi last year, I thought of my government as a Startup. So, I also saw some of the bumps you face on the road. 
I understand your challenges, but also the wonderful feeling of creating something new. 
The course of human history and progress has been shaped by imagination, inspiration, invention and innovation. 
I often say, if there’s a strong wind blowing, some might want to shut the window. Others will want to put up a windmill or launch their sails on the seas. 
The difference between perception of something as a challenge or an opportunity is the difference between inertia and initiative; status quo and progress. 
The idea of Start Ups is as ancient as this world. Each economic age has been defined by disruption of the previous one, by the evolution of ideas and products that displace the old ones.
Start Ups have always been the engine of progress. The mega corporations of today were Startsup of yesterday. 
What is different now is that the digital age has created a fertile new environment for Startups. 
This is a world in which you don't grow by extracting resources, but by spreading an idea. More than the creator, it is the consumer, who discovers applications. 
Today, the Startups defy the natural rates of growth. An idea can become a global name within a year. Customers can multiply at the rate of millions, employees at the rate of thousands and valuation at the rate of billions. 
The convergence of technology, integration across diverse fields, distributed architecture and people willing to back an idea, have opened a new world for enterprise. 
This ecosystem was born in the Silicon Valley. No community is shaping our world as much as the one on this Californian Coast. 
It isn’t just big names, but small firms that are fashioning every day new ways to enrich human life with the joy of artists and creators. 
That underlines America’s success and inspires the world. 
So, I see Startups, technology and innovation as exciting and effective instruments for India’s transformation, and for creating jobs for our youth. 
We are a nation of 800 million youth below the age of 35 years. They are eager for change; have the energy and drive to pursue it; and, the confidence to achieve it. 
When each of the five hundred odd towns produces ten Startups and each of our six hundred thousand villages produce six small businesses, on a regular basis, we will create an enormous economic momentum and generate a huge number of jobs in our country. 
India’s own ecosystem of startups is evolving rapidly. It is driven by the energy, enterprise and innovation of our youth. 
We have a huge market with rapid growth and untapped opportunities in every sector. We now have the institutions, incentives and interest for new ventures. We have incubators, accelerators and investors willing to back an idea and assume risks. 
India has woken up to the potential of Startup Ventures with great enthusiasm and energy. In the past few years, they have grown exponentially. 
We have here an outstanding group of Startups from India. They are applying technology to transform healthcare, education, agriculture, clean energy, security, financial inclusion of the poor and access to clean water. 
Our Startups represent not just commercial success stories, but are powerful examples of social innovation. 
The pace at which people in India are taking to digital technology defies our stereotypes of age, education, language and income. 
There are nearly a billion people with cell phones in India; smart phones and internet users are in hundred millions, growing at high double digits. 
The scale of India's development needs is huge. And, the need to achieve it is urgent. 
We cannot simply continue on the traditional paths to development. 
This is the vision and the spirit behind Digital India, which I spoke about last night: to use technology to transform governance, empower our citizens, eliminate barriers to opportunities, deepen social change, impart scale and speed to development, improve delivery of services, design affordable products for the poor, customize services for specific groups,and build a more sustainable future for our planet. 
Startups will have an important role in achieving our vision. 
From creating infrastructure to providing services, from manufacture of products to human resource development, from supporting governments to enabling citizens and promoting digital literacy, Digital India is a vast cyber world of opportunities for you. 
I see Startups, not as short term investments, but as long term commitments. 
Our application and enterprise is limited only by our imagination. 
We have here today our Department of Space that provides free data on its portal. In the course of past few months, we have put together 170 applications of space technology in governance and development. 
Many of these could become the vehicles of new ventures in India. 
But, it is not just about the opportunities generated on the digital platform and advanced science by urban enterprises. 
I want to see the idea and the spirit of Startups light up the economies and the fortunes of people in rural India. From handicrafts to tourism, the frontiers of possibilities and the scale of reach in India is immense. 
I want this especially for our rural women, who have shown marvelous success in enterprise, whenever they have had opportunity. They transform not only our rural economy, but also our society. 
Our development models speak of Public Sector and Private Sector. I speak of a third sector, Personal Sector, of individual enterprises, micro enterprises and micro finances. 
That is why I focused on Startup India in the Independence Day Address this year. 
We are launching schemes that will support our mission. And, I assure you that they won’t trap your creativity in long government procedures. 
One is the Atal Innovation Mission, after former Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayeeji to promote innovation. 
Another is SETU, which means bridge in Hindi – Self Employment & Talent Utilisation (SETU). This will be an incubation and facilitation programme. 
We are also setting up Electronics Development Fund to support design, development and launch of new products. 
We are reforming our regulations and processes, and making it easier to start and do business in India. 
We are making our digital infrastructure and services accessible and affordable that will also bring broadband to six hundred thousand villages, and free Wi Fi to schools, universities and public places. 
We are also giving the highest importance to data privacy and security, intellectual property rights and cyber security. 
So, Make in India, Skill India and Design India will create a surge of opportunities. 
So, friends, as we thought of Startups, it was natural to choose Silicon Valley for our first overseas event. 
For, India and the United States have a natural partnership of innovation and technology that has shaped the knowledge economy. 
I am told thatIndians account for 15% of startups here. Hundreds of thousands of Indian professionals here and in India are contributing to the global success of U.S. enterprises. Many are leading them today. 
Our universities, labs and firms are working together for next generation advanced bio fuels, solar energy and energy efficiency. 
Young Stanford scholars are teaming up with Indian counterparts in Delhi to make affordable biomedical devices for rural India. MIT Tata Centre's Khethworks is changing the lives of small farmers with solar-based irrigation systems. 
We have here with us Manu Prakash, a young Indian scientist in Stanford, who has a lab to his name at the university. 
This is the power of our cooperation and collaboration. Sitting here, you can touch the life of a young child in a remote village.
I also hope that a young girl in a small town in India will look at the exhibitors today and dream of her own project. And, someone in Mumbai or the Bay Area will be the angel to her dreams. 
This is the possibility of the digital bridge - to connect distant lives and change fortunes and future. 
This is the potential of youth and innovation. 
It can ignite a partnership between India and the United States, which can advance prosperity in our two countries and give new content to our strategic partnership. 
It can enable us to lead in the digital century and find solutions to enduring human problems and emerging global challenges. 
I am delighted to see so many new partnerships formed today. 
I am honoured to launch the BHARAT Fund today – which stands not just for India, but also for Better Health, Agriculture, Renewable and Technologies. 
I am delighted that Qualcomm announced a fund of USD 150 million for Startups in India. I want to than TiE for its valued suggestions for creating a more supportive environment for Startups. 
I know you will succeed on the strength of your genius and enterprise. But, when you need a helping hand, or when you find hurdles in your way, we will be there for you. 
Let me thank NASSCOM, Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad and TiE Silicon Valley for this very special event. 
I am confident that you have inspired many young talents in India, launched thousand new dreams, and sown the seeds of many India-U.S. partnerships. 
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
26 8 2015, USA
Digital India Dinner
Thank you, Shantanu, John, Satya, Paul, Sunder, and Venkatesh
A big thank you!
I am sure this was not pre-arranged. But, here on stage you see a perfect picture of India-U.S. partnership in the digital economy.
Good Evening, everyone!
If there was ever a gathering under one roof that could claim to be shaping the world, it is this. And, I am not talking about those in public office, here or in India! It’s a great pleasure to be here in California. It is one of the last places in the world to see the sun set. But, it is here that new ideas see the first light of the day. 
It’s a great honour that you have joined us tonight. I have met many of you in Delhi and New York, and on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram. 
These are the new neighborhoods of our new world. 
If Facebook were a country, it would be the third most populous one and the most connected.
Google today has made teachers less awe-inspiring and grandparents more idle. Twitter has turned everyone into a reporter. The traffic lights that need to work the best are on CISCO routers. 
The status that now matters is not whether you are awake or asleep, but whether you are online or offline. The most fundamental debate for our youth is the choice between Android, iOS or Windows. 
From computing to communication, entertainment to education, from printing documents to printing products, and, now to internet of things, it's been a long journey in a short time. 
From cleaner energy to better healthcare and safer transport, everything is converging around the work you do. 
In Africa, it's helping people transfer money on phone. It has made reaching small island states no longer a journey of adventure, but a convenient click of a mouse.
In India, a mother in a distant hill village has a better chance to save her new born infant. A child in a remote village has better access to education. 
A small farmer is more confident about his land holding and getting better market price. A fisherman on the sea has a better catch. And, a young professional in San Francisco can Skype daily to comfort her sick grandmother in India. 
An initiative by a father in Haryana for "Selfie with daughter" to draw attention to the girl child became an international movement. 
All this is because of the work you people are doing. Since my government came to office last year, we have attacked poverty by using the power of networks and mobile phones to launch a new era of empowerment and inclusion: 180 million new bank accounts in a few months; direct transfer of benefits to the poor; funds for the unbanked; insurance within the reach of the poorest; and, pension for the sunset years for all. 
By using Space technology and internet, we have been able to identify in the last few months 170 applications that will make governance better and development faster. 
When a small craftsman in a village in India brings a smile to a customer looking at his phone on a metro ride in New York; When a heart patient in a remote hospital in Kyrgyz Republic is treated by doctors sitting in Delhi, as I saw in Bishkek, we know we are creating something that has fundamentally changed our lives. 
The pace at which people are taking to digital technology defies our stereotypes of age, education, language and income. I like recounting my meeting with a group of unlettered tribal women in a remote part of Gujarat. They were present at a local milk chilling plant I was inaugurating. They were using cell phones to take photographs of the event. I asked them what they would do with the images. The answer was a surprise for me. 
They said,they would go back, have the images downloaded on to a computer and take printouts. Yes, they were familiar with the language of our digital world. 
And, farmers in Maharashtra State have created a Whatsapp group to share information on farming practices. 
Customers, more than creators, are defining the use of a product. The world may be driven by the same ancient impulses. We will continue to see human struggles and successes. We will witness human glory and tragedies. 
But, in this digital age, we have an opportunity to transform lives of people in ways that was hard to imagine just a couple of decades ago.
This is what sets us apart from the century that we have just left behind. There may be still some who see the digital economy as the tool of the rich, educated and the privileged. But, ask the taxi driver or the corner vendor in India what he has gained from his cell phone, and the debate gets settled. I see technology as a means to empower and as a tool that bridges the distance between hope and opportunity. Social media is reducing social barriers. It connects people on the
strength of human values, not identities. 
Today, technology is advancing citizen empowerment and democracy that once drew their strength from Constitutions. Technology is forcing governments to deal with massive volume of data and generate responses, not in 24 hours but in 24 minutes. 
When you think of the exponential speed and scale of expansion of social media or a service, you have to believe that it is equally possible to rapidly transform the lives of those who have long stood on the margins of hope. So, friends out of this conviction was born the vision of Digital India. 
It is an enterprise for India's transformation on a scale that is, perhaps, unmatched in human history. Not just to touch the lives of the weakest, farthest and the poorest citizen of India, but change the way our nation will live and work. 
For nothing else will do in a country with 800 million youth under the age of 35 years, impatient for change and eager to achieve it. 
We will transform governance, making it more transparent, accountable, accessible and participative. I spoke of E-Governance as a foundation of better governance – efficient, economical and effective. 
I now speak of M-Governance or mobile governance. That is the way to go in a country with one billion cell phones and use of smart phones growing at high double digit rates. It has the potential to make development a truly inclusive and comprehensive mass movement. It puts governance within everyone's reach. 
After MyGov.in, I have just launched the Narendra Modi Mobile App. They are helping me stay in close touch with people. I learn a great deal from their suggestions and complaints. 
We want to free our citizens from the burden of excessive paper documents in every office. We want paperless transactions. We will set up a digital locker for every citizen to store personal documents that can be shared across departments. 
We have set up Ebiz portal to make approvals for businesses and citizens easy and efficient so that they concentrate their energy on their goals, not on government processes. 
We are using technology to impart scale and speed to development. 
Information, education, skills, healthcare, livelihood, financial inclusion, small and village enterprises, opportunities for women, conservation of natural resources, distributed clean energy – entirely new possibilities have emerged to change the development model. 
But for all this, we must bridge the digital divide and promote digital literacy in the same way that we seek to ensure general literacy.
We must ensure that technology is accessible, affordable, and adds value. 
We want our 1.25 billion citizens to be digitally connected. We already have broadband usage across India go up by 63% last year. We need to accelerate this further. 
We have launched an aggressive expansion of the National Optical Fibre Network that will take broadband to our 600,000 villages. We will connect all schools and colleges with broadband. Building I-ways are as important as highways. 
We are expanding our public Wi-Fi hotspots. For example, we want to ensure that free Wi Fi is not only there in airport lounges, but also on our railway platforms. Teaming up with Google, we will cover 500 railway stations in a short time. 
We are also setting up Common Service Centres in villages and towns. We will also use information technology to build smart cities. 
And, we want to turn our villages into smart economic hubs and connect our farmers better to markets and makes them less vulnerable to the whims of weather. 
For me, access also means that content should be in local languages. In a country with 22 official languages, it is a formidable, but an important task. 
Affordability of products and services is critical for our success. There are many dimensions to this. We will promote manufacture of quality and affordable products in India. That is part of our vision of Make in India, Digital India and Design in India. 
As our economy and our lives get more wired, we are also giving the highest importance to data privacy and security, intellectual property rights and cyber security. 
And,I know to achieve the vision of Digital India, the government must also start thinking a bit like you. 
So, from creating infrastructure to services, from manufacture of products to human resource development, from support governments to enabling citizens and promoting digital literacy, Digital India is a vast cyber world of opportunities for you.
The task is huge; the challenges are many. But, we also know that we will not reach new destinations without taking new roads.
Much of India that we dream of is yet to be built. So, we have the opportunity to shape its path now. 
And, we have the talent, enterprise and skills to succeed. 
We also have the strength of the partnership between India and the United States. 
Indians and Americans have worked together to shape the knowledge economy. They have made us aware of the vast potential of technology. 
From large corporate to young professionals in this great centre of innovation, each can be part of the Digital India story. 
The sustainable development of one-sixth of humanity will be a major force of good for our world and our planet. 
Today, we speak of India-U.S. partnership as a defining partnership of this century. It hinges on two major reasons. Both converge here in California. 
We all know that the dynamic Asia Pacific Region will shape the course of this century. And, India and the United States, the world's two largest democracies, are located at the two ends of this region. 
We have the responsibility to shape a future of peace, stability and prosperity in this region. 
Our relationship is also defined by the power of youth, technology and innovation. These can ignite a partnership that will advance and sustain prosperity in our two countries. 
Even more, in this Digital Age, we can draw on the strength of our values and partnership to shape a better and more sustainable future for the world. 
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
26 9 2015, USA
G4 summit new york
Your Excellency President Dilma Rousseff, 
Your Excellency Chancellor Angela Merkel, 
Your Excellency Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, 
Distinguished delegation members, 
I am delighted to welcome you all. Thank you for attending this meeting early on a Saturday morning. I want to especially thank Prime Minister Abe, who has just arrived in New York. 
The subject of reforms in the United Nations Security Council has been the focus of global attention for decades – unfortunately, without progress so far. 
Our Group of four countries, G-4, came together in 2004, bound by our shared commitment to global peace and prosperity, our faith in multilateralism and our willingness to assume our global responsibilities that the world expects from us. 
I am delighted that we are meeting again as Heads of Government after ten years.
As I had reflected in my letter on the 70th anniversary of the United Nations, we live in a fundamentally different world from the time the UN was born. The number of Member States has grown four-fold. Threats to peace and security have become more complex, unpredictable and undefined. In many ways, our lives are becoming globalized, but fault-lines around our identities are growing. 
We live in a digital age. The global economy is changed, with new engines of growth, more widely dispersed economic power and widening wealth gap. 
Trends in demography, urbanization and migrations are posing new challenges. Climate change and terrorism are new concerns. Cyber and Space are entirely new frontiers of opportunities and challenges. 
Yet, our institutions, approaches, and often mindsets, reflect the wisdom of the century we have left behind, not the century we live in. This is especially true of the United Nations Security Council. 
The reform of the Security Council within a fixed time frame has become an urgent and important task. The Security Council must include the world's largest democracies, major locomotives of the global economy, and voices from all the major continents. It will carry greater credibility and legitimacy and will be more representative and effective in addressing the challenges of the 21st century. 
After decades, we finally see some movement. The 69th Session of the General Assembly has taken a significant step forward to commence text-based negotiations. This would not have been possible but for the dynamic leadership of H.E. Mr. Sam Kutesa and Ambassador Courtney Rattray. 
However, this is just the first step. We should aim to take this process to its logical conclusion during the 70th session. I am confident that our meeting today will give a big impetus to our efforts in this direction.
#DELIMITER#
25 8 2015, USA
united nations post 2015 development agenda
Excellencies, 
Mahatma Gandhi had once said, “One must care about the world one will not see”. Indeed, humanity has progressed when it has collectively risen to its obligation to the world and responsibility to the future.
Seventy years after the end of a tragic war and birth of a new hope for our age, we are meeting to chart a course for our humanity and our planet. I consider this a very important summit and thank UN Secretary General for organizing it. 
Just as our vision behind the Agenda 2030 is lofty, our goals are comprehensive. It gives priority to the problems that have endured through the past decades. And, it reflects our evolving understanding of the social, economic and environmental linkages that define our lives. 
We live in an age of unprecedented prosperity, but also unspeakable deprivation around the world. 
I am pleased that elimination of poverty in all forms everywhere is at the top of our goals. Addressing the needs of 1.3 billion poor people in the world is not merely a question of their survival and dignity or our moral responsibility. It is a vital necessity for ensuring peaceful, sustainable and just world. 
A great Indian thinker, Pandit Deen Dayal Upadhyay, placed the welfare of the poorest at the centre of his thoughts. This is what we also see in the 2030 Agenda. It is a happy coincidence that we are beginning the celebration of Pandit Deen Dayal Upadhyay’s 100th anniversary today. 
The goals recognize that economic growth, industrialization, infrastructure, and access to energy provide the foundations of development. 
We welcome the prominence given to environmental goals, especially climate change and sustainable consumption. The distinct goal on ocean ecosystem reflects the unique character of its challenges and opportunities. Equally important, it focuses our attention on the future of the island states.
I speak about Blue Revolution, which includes the prosperity, sustainable use of marine wealth and blue skies. 
Today, much of India’s development agenda is mirrored in the Sustainable Development Goals. 
Since Independence, we have pursued the dream of eliminating poverty from India. We have chosen the path of removing poverty by empowering the poor. We have placed priority on education and skill development. 
Our attack on poverty today includes expanded conventional schemes of development, but we have also launched a new era of inclusion and empowerment, turning distant dreams into immediate possibilities: new bank accounts for 180 million; direct transfer of benefits; funds to the unbanked; insurance within the reach of all; and, pension for everyone's sunset years. 
The world speaks of private sector and public sector. In India, we have defined a new personal sector of individual enterprise, micro enterprises and micro finance, drawing also on the strength of digital and mobile applications. 
We are focusing on the basics: housing, power, water and sanitation for all – important not just for welfare, but also human dignity. These are goals with a definite date, not just a mirage of hope. Our development is intrinsically linked to empowerment of women and it begins with a massive programme on educating the girl child that has become every family’s mission. 
We are making our farms more productive and better connected to markets; and, farmers less vulnerable to the whims of nature.
We are reviving our manufacturing, improving our services sector, investing on an unprecedented scale in infrastructure; and, making our cities smart, sustainable and engines of progress. 
We are committed to a sustainable path to prosperity. It comes from the natural instinct of our tradition and culture. But, it is also rooted firmly in our commitment to the future. 
We represent a culture that calls our planet Mother Earth.
As our ancient text say: "Keep pure! For the Earth is our mother! And we are her children!" 
Our national plans are ambitious and purposeful: new capacity of 175 GW of renewable energy over the next seven years; energy efficiency; a tax on coal; a huge afforestation programme; reforming our transportation; and, cleaning up our cities and rivers. The energy intensity of our growth will continue to decline. 
Sustainable development of one-sixth of humanity will be of great consequence to the world and our beautiful planet. It will be a world of fewer challenges and greater hope; and, more confident of its success. 
Our success will give us more resources to share with our friends. As India’s ancient saying goes, the wise look at the world as one family. 
Today, India is fulfilling its responsibilities as development partners in Asia and Africa and with small island states from the Pacific to the Atlantic. 
Nations have a national responsibility for sustainable development. They also need policy space. 
However, we are here today in the United Nations because we all believe that international partnership must be at the centre of our efforts, whether it is development or combating climate change. 
And, the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities is the bedrock of our collective enterprise.
When we speak only of climate change, there is a perception of our desire to secure the comforts of our lifestyle. When we speak of climate justice, we demonstrate our sensitivity and resolve to secure the future of the poor from the perils of natural disasters. 
In addressing climate change, it is important to focus on solutions that can help us reach our goals. We should forge a global public partnership to harness technology, innovation and finance to put affordable clean and renewable energy within the reach of all. 
Equally, we must look for changes in our lifestyles that would make us less dependent on energy and more sustainable in our consumption. 
It is equally critical to launch a global education programme that prepares our next generation to protect and conserve Nature. 
I hope that the Developed World will fulfil its financing commitments for development and climate change, without in any way putting both under the same head! 
I also hope that the Technology Facilitation Mechanism will turn technology and innovation into an effective instrument for global public good, not just private returns. 
As we see now, distance is no insulation from challenges. And, they can rise from the shadows of conflict and privations from distant lands. 
So, we must transform international partnerships on the strength of solidarity with fellow human beings and also our enlightened self-interest.
And, we must also reform the United Nations, including its Security Council, so that it carries greater credibility and legitimacy and will be more representative and effective in achieving our goals. 
There is no cause greater than shaping a world, in which every life that enters it can look to a future of security, opportunity and dignity; and, where we leave our environment in better shape for the next generation. And, no cause that is more challenging. 
At 70, we are called to rise to that challenge, with our wisdom, experience, generosity, compassion, skills and technology. 
I am confident that we can. 
In the end, let me express my hope for everyone’s well with a few lines from our ancient texts: 
May all be happy, may all be healthy, may all see welfare, may no one have any sorrow. 
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
20 9 2015, India
mann ki baat
My dear countrymen, greetings to you all. This is the twelfth episode of “Mann Ki Baat” and in a way it means that we have completed one year. Last year on 3rd October I had an opportunity to conduct my first ever “Mann Ki Baat”. “Mann Ki Baat” – one year, many thoughts. I am not sure of what you gained, but I can certainly say that I gained a lot.
In a democracy the power of the people is of great significance. This thought has been fundamental to my thinking and that is why I have immense faith in the power of the people. But with Mann Ki Baat whatever I was taught, whatever I was explained and the experiences I had, made me realize that the power of the people is limitless and it far exceeds our thinking. Our ancestors would say that there is a divine element in each individual. My experience of “Mann Ki Baat” made
me realize that the thinking of our ancestors was very powerful and had great authenticity in them as I have myself experienced them. I asked for suggestions for “Mann Ki Baat” and yet could touch upon just 3-4 of them. But people continued to contribute actively in lakhs. This in itself is a great power. I did not feel that anyone got disheartened thinking that I wrote a letter to the PM or posted on mygov.in, yet my suggestions were not accepted even once.
Yes …. These lakhs of letters did teach me something more. I became aware of very minute problems associated with governance. I would like to congratulate Akashwani for not treating these suggestions as mere bits of paper but considered them as expectations of the people. They conducted programmes after that. They called in various departments and put across them the issues that the people had raised. They tried to get certain problems resolved. The various departments of the
government analyzed these letters and segregated them as the ones related to policy matters, others to personal issues, some others as pointers that the government was not even aware of. Many things arose from the grass root level and reached the government. It is true, the basic principle of governance is that information should percolate upwards from bottom and guidance should percolate from the top to the bottom. Who would have thought that the “Mann Ki Baat” will become a source of
information? But this has happened.
In the same way “Mann Ki Baat” became a platform to express the power of society. I had just casually mentioned about selfie with daughter and what a movement it became. The whole world was amazed. Lakhs of people, perhaps from all the countries of the world posted a selfie with their daughters. What dignity did it lend to our daughters? Anyone who clicked this selfie not only boosted their daughter’s confidence but also made a commitment to them. Whosoever saw it realized that they
will now have to give up the indifferent attitude towards daughters. This was a kind of a silent revolution.
I had casually mentioned to my fellow citizens, keeping in mind the tourism industry of India to send me good pictures of the destination they travel to on the lines of Incredible India so that I can also see them. People sent pictures in lakhs from every corner of India. Neither the Government of India nor the state tourism departments were aware of such heritage. All things were brought together on a platform and the government did not have to spend a single penny. The people
themselves took the task forward.
In October last year, I did my first “Mann Ki Baat”. In that edition I had mentioned about Gandhi Jayanti. I told people that we are celebrating Gandhiji’s birth Anniversary on 2nd October. There was a time when there was Khadi for Nation? Isn’t it the need of the hour that there be Khadi for fashion? I requested the people to buy Khadi and to do their bit. Today, I can say with great satisfaction that in the past one year the sales of Khadi have almost doubled. Now see, there was
no government advertisement. Nor were lakhs and crores spent. A simple feeling and realization by the people has brought this change.
Once I had mentioned in “Mann Ki Baat” about the problem of poor families, how their children cry due to the pollution when the wooden stove are lit. Shouldn’t they be getting gas cylinders? And I had requested the affluent to surrender their gas subsidy. Just think…Today I can say with great pride that 30 lakh families have given up their gas subsidy and these are not the rich people. I saw on T.V, a retired teacher, a widow lady standing in a queue to give up her subsidy. The
common people from the society belonging to the middle and lower middle class have difficulty in giving up subsidy. But then they did give up their subsidy. Isn’t it a silent revolution? Isn’t it a demonstration of the people’s power?
The governments too will need to learn a lesson that there lies a powerful society which has tremendous capabilities, energy and the determination beyond the realms of their administration. There is more likelihood of the government being a catalytic agent of change if it is better connected to the society. “Mann Ki Baat” has turned my faith into belief and reverence and once again I would like to salute this immense power of the people through this platform. They took up every
small cause and made it their own and tried to contribute to the welfare of the country. Can there be a bigger satisfaction than this?
This time I thought of conducting a new experiment through Mann Ki Baat. I had requested the citizens to call up telephonically and get their suggestions or queries recorded. I told them that I will take it up in Mann Ki Baat. I am happy that we received more than 55,000 calls from across the country – be it Siachen, Kutch or Kamrup, be it Kashmir or Kanyakumari. There is no part of India from which I did not receive a phone call. This is a pleasant experience in itself.
People of all age groups have sent messages. I listened to some message personally and I liked them. My team is working on the others. You must have spent just a minute or two but for me your phone calls are very important. The entire government will work on your suggestions.
But there was something which surprised me and made me equally happy. It feels as if there is negativity all around us. But my experience was different. These 55,000 people expressed themselves in their own way. It was frank interaction where they could say anything but I am surprised that all the things were in the shadow of Mann Ki Baat. They were totally positive, suggestion oriented and constructive. Just see how the citizens of the country are moving with a positive attitude;
this is the nation’s greatest wealth. There were serious complaints in about 1-2% phone calls. But more than 90% things were energizing and pleasant.
Another thing came to my mind, for the specially–abled. And among them especially from the kin of visually impaired, they made quite a number of phone calls. The reason may be that they are not able to watch T.V, but they must definitely be listening to the radio. This made me realize how important the radio is for the visually impaired people. I am seeing a new aspect and they put forth such good suggestions that they are enough to make the governments more sensitive.
Pawan Acharya form Alwar, Rajasthan has sent me a message. I believe that all of you should hear it and follow it. Please hear what he wants to say-
“My name is Pawan Acharya and I belong to Alwar, Rajasthan. I want to give the message to Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi ji to request all the people of India through his programme “Mann Ki Baat” to use as much earthen lamps (diya) as they can this Diwali. This will not only help the environment, but will also provide employment to many potter families. Thank you.
Pawan, I believe that this sentiment will definitely reach every corner of India. It is a good suggestion and the soil is priceless. So the earthen lamps will be valuable too. It is important from environmental point of view and it is made in a poor man’s home. Poor people earn their living this way. I request the citizens to follow Pawan’s advice in the coming festivals. If we do so then the lamp may well be lit not only in our homes but it will illuminate the house of the poor.
My dear countrymen, on the day of Ganesh Chaturthi, I had the privilege of spending 2-3 hours with the jawans of the armed forces. The jawans from our Army, Navy and Air force guarding our land, waters and skies. We have completed 50 years of our war with Pakistan in 1965. To commemorate this event an exhibition named “Shouryanjali” had been organized near India Gate. I saw it with immense interest. I went there for half an hour but when I came out it was more than 2.5 hours and
I felt like seeing more. What was it that was not there? The entire history has been brought to life. From aesthetic perspective it was excellent, from historical perspective it was very educative and if we see it from inspirational point of view from the perspective to serve the motherland then there can be no greater inspiration than this. At that time there was not much photography or videography but still those proud moments of war, those tales of valour and sacrifice of our great
soldiers, which we had heard can all be experienced here through this exhibition.
Whether it is the battle of Haji Pir, Chaminda or Asal Uttar and the visuals of our victory near Haji Pir, we feel thrilled and immensely proud of our soldiers. I had the opportunity to meet the brave families, families of those who had sacrificed their lives and also those who had participated in the war who are in the twilight years of their lives. They too had come and when I was shaking hands, it was filled with great energy was very inspiring. If you want to create history, then it
is necessary to understand the nuances of the past. History binds us to our roots. If we are detached from our history then the possibilities of creating history comes to an end. This exhibition on valour and gallantry helps us to experience our past. It gives us knowledge about our history. And this is an opportunity to inspire people to sow seeds for creating a new history. This exhibition will last a few days. I request you and your relatives living in Delhi and nearby areas to
definitely visit it. And do not be in haste like me. I came back in 2-2.5 hours but you will need 3-4 hours, do see it.
Look at the power of democracy, a young kid has ordered the Prime Minister, although the kid forgot to tell his name in a hurry. I do not have his name with me but what he said is worth giving a thought, not only should the Prime Minister think about what he said but every Indian citizen should listen to what this child has to say:
“Prime Minister, Modi ji, I want to tell you that, for the Swachhta Abhiyan (Cleaniness Drive) that you started, you should get dustbins installed in every street and every corner”.
This child is absolutely right. We should adopt cleanliness as a habit and should make provisions for cleanliness. I got great satisfaction from this child’s message. On the 2nd of October, I declared this cleanliness drive and I think something like this has happened for the first time after Independence because even in the parliament, cleanliness is being discussed for hours these days. Our government is criticized as well. I even have to listen to a lot of things; people say
things like “Modi ji used to talk big about cleanliness, but what really happened?” I don’t get offended by all this. I look at the positive side of it, which is that even the parliament of the country is discussing about the issue of cleanliness in India.
Look at the other side, on one hand the parliament and on the other hand this child of the country, both are talking about cleanliness, a country cannot be more fortunate than this. This ongoing movement of thoughts, the environment that’s building against filth, there has been an awareness towards cleanliness. This will also compel the governments to work. The self-governing regional bodies, be it Panchayats, municipal corporations, municipalities, municipal corporations of
metropolitan cities, central government or state government – everybody will have to work on this. We will have to take this movement forward despite its shortcomings and when in India in 2019, when we celebrate the 150th birthday of Mahatma Gandhi, we should aspire to work in the direction of fulfilling his dream.
Do you know what Mahatma Gandhi used to say? He once said, “if I have to choose between freedom and cleanliness, I will choose cleanliness first and freedom later”. Cleanliness was more important for Gandhi than freedom. Come let us all follow what Mahatma Gandhi said and take a few steps towards fulfilling his wish. Mr. Gulshan Arora from Delhi has left a message on MyGov.
He has written that he wants to know about the birth centenary of Dindayal ji.
My dear fellow citizens, the lives of great men will always inspire us. It is not our responsibility to figure out the ideology of these great men. Everyone who lives and dies for our nation inspires us. In the coming days, we will get to remember a lot of these great men. 25th September we shall remember Pandit Deendayal Upadhaya, Mahatma Gandhi and Lal Bahadur Shastri on the 2nd of October, Jai Prakash Narayan ji on 11th October, Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel on 31st October
and there are innumerable names, I have mentioned just a few because our country has an unending list of such gems.
You pick any date; you will certainly find a name of one or the other great personality from the kaleidoscope of history. We must all try to remember these great personalities in the coming days, take their message to every house and we should try to learn something from them ourselves.
I would like to request you for 2nd October specially. It’s the birth anniversary of Honorable Bapu Mahatma Gandhi. I had told you last year as well that you all must have all kind of fashionable clothing, all kinds of fabric, a lot of things, but you must also own Khadi. I am saying it again, that Khadi begins a discounted sale from 2nd October onwards for one whole month. You must all avail this sale. Along with Khadi, handloom must also be given equal importance.
Our weavers put in a lot of hard work. If we, 1.5 billion Indians buy a handloom product or Khadi for even Rs. 5, 10 or Rs. 50 then ultimately that money will reach the poor weaver. It will reach the poor widow who weaves Khadi and this is why we must all spare some place for Khadi at our homes and on our bodies this Diwali. I just have this small request, I do not insist that you only wear Khadi. But have a few collection…. this is my only request. Look, last year we almost doubled the
Khadi sale. A lot of the poor have been benefitted. Advertisements worth crores, by the government, cannot achieve what has been achieved through your help. This is the power of the masses and this is why I request you to come forward and help once again.
Dear countrymen, my heart is filled with joy because of this one thing. I wish to share this joy with you as well. I visited Kolkata in the month of May and the family members of Subhash Chandra Bose came to meet me. His nephew Chandra Bose had organized everything. I got the opportunity to spend quality time with Subhash Babu’s family members. That day I decided to invite his great family to the Prime Minister’s residence. Mr. Chandra Bose and his family members were in the
process of organising this and last week I received the confirmation that around 50 members of the Bose family are coming to the Prime Minister’s residence for a meeting.
You can imagine how happy I must have been on hearing this news. Netaji’s family members, probably, must have been invited together to the Prime Minister’s residence for the first time. More than that, I feel honoured to realize that this opportunity that I will get in October must be a one of a kind opportunity for the Prime Minister’s residence to offer its hospitality. More than 50 family members of Subhash Babu’s family who stay in different countries are specially coming down
to attend this meeting. It is going to be a joyous moment for me. I am very excited to welcome them and feel extremely happy.
I received a message from Bhargavi Kande and after listening to the way she speaks, her voice, I felt she is a leader herself or she is going to be a leader probably.
“My name is Bhargavi Kande. I want to request the Prime Minister to make the young generation aware about voter’s registration, which will increase the participation of the young generation in the times to come and in the future the young generation will provide its important contribution in selecting as well as running a government. Thank you”
Bhargavi talked about registering the names in the voter’s list and the voting process. In a democracy, every voter determines the destiny of a country and this awareness is spreading gradually. The voting percentage is also increasing and for this I want to congratulate the Election Commission of India. Up until a few years back we saw that our election commission worked only as a regulator but it has changed a lot in the last few years. Today, our election commission does not work
only as a regulator but has become a facilitator, has become voter-friendly and the voter is at the centre of all its policies and its ideologies. It is a great change but we need more than what election commission can do. We must mobilize schools, colleges and societies – we must spread awareness always, not only during the time of elections. The voter’s list must be updated; we must also keep a watch on it. This priceless right that I have, is it safe? Am I using it or not? We must all
develop this habit. I hope that all the youngsters who have not been registered in the voter’s list yet, get themselves registered and must vote too. I publically say during elections that one must cast his vote before he eats his food. This is a holy act, everyone must do it.
I have returned from a visit to Kashi, day before yesterday. I met a lot of people and attended a lot of events. I met many people there but these two kids I met have told me something that I want to share with you today. One of the boys, Kshitij, is a student of class 7. He studies in the Kendriya Vidyalaya of Banaras Hindu University. He is a very smart kid with a surprising high confidence level. At such a young age I saw that he was interested in research in the field
of Physics. I thought he must be reading a lot books, must be surfing internet, must be watching new experiments. He was talking about things like, how to stop railway accidents, which technology to use, how to save money in producing energy, how to develop feelings in robots and what not. He was an amazing kid. Although I could not follow what he was saying, very closely, but I liked his confidence and his interest in so many things. I want that kids in our country should develop
more and more interest in science. Kids should be very inquisitive, why? How? When? A kid should always ask these questions.
Similarly, I met a small girl named, Sonam Patel. She is 9 years old. She is the daughter of Sadavrat Patel, a resident of Sundarpur, Varanasi. Her family is very poor. I was surprised that the girl had memorized the Bhagvada Geeta completely but the most interesting thing was that she kept reciting the shlokas along with its English interpretation and its definition in English as well as Hindi. When I asked, her father told me that she started reciting these shlokas since she was only
five years old. I asked where she learned it from. They said, “We do not have any idea.” Then I asked if she only reads Geetha or does she read something else as well? Her father then told me that if she picks up mathematics once, she has everything memorized by the evening. If she picks history, she knows everything by the evening. He told me that the whole family is surprised at this amazing talent the girl has. I was really very impressed. Sometimes, kids become obsessed
with celebrities; Sonam did not have any such obsessions. I felt this girl is God-gifted.
Meeting these kids was a very special experience that I had on my Kashi visit. So, I thought I must share it with you. We do a lot of things, other than what you see on the TV and read in the newspapers. Sometimes, we enjoy doing these things as well. Similarly, I will always cherish the memories of this encounter with these kids.
I noticed that a few people get a lot of work for me in ‘Mann Ki Baat.’
Look what Sandeep from Haryana has to say, “Sir, I want you to do ‘Mann ki Baat’ a weekly chore rather than a monthly program because we get very inspired by your words.”
Sandeep ji, what all will you make me do? I have to struggle even to make it to the monthly programme, have to make adjustments to my time-table. Sometimes, our friends at Akashwani have to wait for an hour or so. I still respect your feelings. I am thankful to you for your suggestion. For now, we will stick to the one month program only.
‘Mann Ki Baat’ in a way has completed a year. Do you know, how much did Subhash babu use the Radio? He started his own show from Germany and he would constantly update the Indian citizens about the Independence movement through radio. He started the Azad Hind Radio through a weekly news bulletin. English, Hindi, Bengali, Marathi Punjabi, Pashto, Urdu, he used to run the radio in all these languages.
I have also completed a year since I started ‘Mann Ki Baat.’ My ‘Mann Ki Baat’ has in the true sense become your ‘Mann Ki Baat.’ I listen to you, I think for you, I look into your suggestions and that triggers a thought process in me which reaches you through Akashvani. I speak, but the words are yours and this gives me immense satisfaction. We shall meet next month again for ‘Mann Ki Baat.’ Your suggestions should keep coming in. The government gets benefited by your suggestions. It
helps to initiate improvement. Your contribution is priceless for me.
Once again, many congratulations to all of you. Thank you!
#DELIMITER#
15 9 2015, India
Joint Press with Sri Lankan Prime Minister
Your Excellency Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe, 
Members of the media, 
I am delighted to extend a warm welcome to you, and Prof. Maithree Wickremesinghe, and members of your delegation. 
Let me congratulate you once again for leading the United National Front for Good Governance alliance to victory in last month's parliamentary elections. 
We are deeply honoured that you have chosen India as your first overseas destination. It is a happy coincidence that your last full term as Sri Lanka’s Prime Minister coincided with the first NDA Government. 
We thank you for your belief in and steadfast support for India-Sri Lanka relations. You are a deeply valued friend, whose vision for Sri Lanka’s progress and commitment to its pursuit is greatly admired in India.
This is a historic year for India-Sri Lanka relations, as it is for Sri Lanka. We had the honour of hosting President Sirisena on his maiden visit abroad in February. I had the privilege of an extraordinary visit to Sri Lanka in March. Now, we have Prime Minister Wickremesinghe here. 
Sri Lanka has voted twice this year for change, reforms, reconciliation and progress. There can be no stronger statement of Sri Lanka’s democratic tradition. There can be no clearer sign of Sri Lanka’s march towards a peaceful, inclusive, and prosperous future. 
As a close neighbour and friend, we wish Sri Lanka every success; rejoice in your progress; and, assure you of India’s unwavering support. 
So, we are pleased that the Government of Sri Lanka has taken a number of significant steps in recent times. The leadership has shown remarkable political unity, at a time of great hope. 
I am confident that with the wisdom and will of the leadership in Sri Lanka and the support of the people, Sri Lanka will achieve genuine reconciliation and development, so that all Sri Lankans, including the Sri Lankan Tamil community, can live a life of equality, justice, peace and dignity in a united Sri Lanka. 
Your progress is important for our two countries, South Asia and our maritime region. 
Prime Minister and I had excellent discussions today. 
We welcomed some significant developments in bilateral relations since March, including the currency swap arrangement. We also expressed hope that progress on key bilateral initiatives and projects will gather speed now.
We both want deeper economic engagement. We would like to see our trade grow and become more balanced for Sri Lanka. We discussed how we can achieve these goals in a more open and competitive Indian market, including through bilateral arrangements for trade and investments. 
I also sought his support for Indian investors, who are keen to participate in Sri Lanka’s economic development, especially in infrastructure, energy and transport sectors. 
I offered India’s full support to strengthen connectivity between our two countries to deepen human and economic links that will benefit all sections of our societies. 
I assured Prime Minister Wickremesinghe of continuing commitment to our development partnership - in infrastructure, railways, energy, community development projects, agriculture, capacity building, science and technology, space and civil nuclear field. 
We will continue to nurture people-to-people ties. We just finished an absorbing test series. We shall all miss the great Kumar Sangakkara on the cricket field. 
We recognise our closely aligned security interests and the need to remain sensitive to each other’s concerns. We both reaffirmed our commitment to deepen our defence and security cooperation. 
We will intensify cooperation in combating terrorism and work together for security and stability in our maritime neighbourhood. Sri Lanka is our largest partner in defence training programme and we will continue to expand our cooperation in this area. 
Prime Minister and I also discussed the fishermen issue. We agreed that fishermen's associations on both sides should continue their efforts to find a solution. 
I conveyed to him that this should be seen as a humanitarian issue that affects livelihoods. I informed him of the steps we are taking to encourage Indian fishermen to take up deep sea fishing.
In conclusion, let me say that India and Sri Lanka have a huge stake in each other’s success, and in stability and development in our region. 
This is a relationship that touches the hearts of ordinary Indians and Sri Lankans. It is also of great strategic importance to our two countries. With President Sirisena and Prime Minister Wickremesinghe, we can look to the future with great optimism. 
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
5 9 2015, India
Global hindu buddhist conclave
Shri Ramnath Kovind, Governor of Bihar, 
Venerable KHAMBA LAMA CH. DEMBEREL from Mongolia, 
Venerable MING KUANG SHI from Taiwan, 
Venerable THICH THIEN TAM from Vietnam, 
Venerable TELO TULKU RINPOCHE from Russia, 
Venerable Banagala Upatissa from Sri Lanka, 
Venerable LAMA LOBZANG, 
My Ministerial colleague Shri Kiren Rijiju, 
Minister Lyonpo Namgay Dorji of Bhutan, 
Minister Bayarsaikhan of Mongolia 
Venerable members of the Maha Sanga, visiting Ministers and Diplomats from foreign countries, 
I am very happy to be in the midst of all of you. I feel very blessed to be here at Bodh Gaya. After Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru and Atal Bihari Vajpayee, I have the opportunity to visit this sacred place.
I am meeting you all on a very special day. Today, we in India are observing Teachers’ Day, to commemorate the birth anniversary of our 2nd President, a great scholar and teacher, Dr. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan.
In this symposium we have been talking about one of the most impactful teachers in world history, Gautama Buddha. His teachings have inspired millions of people over centuries.
Today, we are also celebrating Janmashtami, the day Lord Krishna was born. The world has so much to learn from Lord Krishna. When we talk about Lord Krishna we say, श्री कृष्णम वंदे जगतगुरुम -Shri Krishna, the teacher of all teachers; the Guru of all Gurus.
Both, Gautama Buddha and Lord Krishna have taught the world so much. The themes of this conference, in a way are inspired by the values and ideals given by these two greats.
Shri Krishna gave his message before the start of the Great War in the Mahabharata and Lord Buddha repeatedly emphasized on rising above warfare. The message by both of them was about establishing Dharma.
Both of them gave great prominence to principles and processes. Gautama Buddha gave the eight-fold path and the Panchsheel. while Shri Krishna gave invaluable lessons of life in the form of Karma Yoga. These two divine souls had the strength to bring people together, rising above differences. Their teachings are most practical, eternal and are more relevant in this day and age than ever before.
The place where we are meeting makes it even more special. We are meeting in Bodh Gaya, a land that has a distinctive place in the history of humankind.  
This is the land of enlightenment. Years ago, what Bodh Gaya got was Siddhartha but what Bodh Gaya gave to the world was Lord Buddha, the epitome of knowledge, peace and compassion.
This is, therefore the ideal venue for a dialogue and meeting here on the auspicious day of Janmashtami and the special day of Teachers’ Day makes this unique.
It was my great privilege to have participated in the Inaugural function of the first International Hindu Buddhist Initiative on “Conflict Avoidance and Environmental Consciousness” hosted by the Vivekananda International Foundation and Tokyo Foundation with the support of the International Buddhist Confederation at Delhi day before yesterday.
The Conference was conceptualised on shifting the paradigm from conflict resolution to conflict avoidance and from environmental regulation to environmental consciousness.
I had shared some of my thoughts on the two critical themes which are threatening humanity as no other challenge before. I recalled how in the context of both issues and for changing the global paradigm of thinking the world is looking to the Buddha today as conflict resolution mechanisms and environmental regulations — both of them dependent on the instrumentality of nation states — are increasingly failing to measure up to challenges.
Spiritual and religious leaders and also intellectuals, largely from Buddhist societies participated in the two day conference and deliberated on the two issues. At the end of the two day conference, and after a churning in which spiritual, religious and intellectual leaders participated, the Tokyo Foundation has announced that they have decided to hold a similar conference in January 2016. And other Buddhist nations have also offered to hold similar conferences in their
countries.
This is an extraordinary development which coincides with the rise of Asia as an economic and civilisational phenomenon. The themes of the conference, informed and shaped by the Hindu-Buddhist civilisational and cultural perspectives, promise to deepen the notion of conflict avoidance philosophy and environmental consciousness in Asia and beyond.
The two day conference seems to have arrived at a broad consensus on both issues. On the issue of conflicts — most of which are being driven by religious intolerance — the participants in the conference seem to have agreed that while there is no problem about the freedom to practise one’s religion, it is when the radical elements try to force their own ideologies on others, that the potential for conflict arises. On the issue of environment, the conference seems to have agreed
that the philosophic underpinning of the Dharma, which stresses the protection of natural heritage, is critical for sustainable development. I may add that the United Nations too has arrived at the view that sustainable development is achievable only through aligning development to the local culture of the people.
This, in my view, is a positive turn in the development modelling of the world of diversity. I may add that the turn in thinking at the global level has created the eco-system for the Hindu-Buddhist societies to carry forward their consensual ideas to the global fora. I personally consider the Hindu Buddhist Conference on Conflict Avoidance and Environmental Consciousness as an important development in a world that seems to be short of durable ideas on both issues.
Hindu philosophy was one of the greatest beneficiaries of the advent and the teachings of the Lord Buddha.
Many scholars have analysed the impact of Buddha on Hinduism. In fact, Adi Sankara was even critiqued for the way he was influenced by the Buddha and Sankara was called as “Prachhanna Boudha" — meaning Sankara was Buddha in disguised form. That was the extent of influence of the Buddha on Adi Sankara, regarded by many as the tallest Hindu philosopher. At the mass level Buddha was so venerated that Jayadeva in his Geeta Govinda even praised him as Mahavishnu or God himself who
descended to preach Ahimsa. So, Hinduism after the Buddha’s advent became Buddhist Hinduism or Hindu Buddhism. They are today an inseparable amalgam.
This is how Swami Vivekananda praised Buddha. 
I quote: 
At the time Buddha was born, India was in need of a great spiritual leader, a prophet. 
Buddha never bowed down to anything, neither Veda, nor caste, nor priest, nor custom. He fearlessly reasoned so far as reason could take him. Such a fearless search for truth and such love for every living thing the world has never seen. 
Buddha was more brave and sincere than any teacher. 
Buddha was the first human being to give to this world a complete system of morality. He was good for good's sake, he loved for love's sake. 
Buddha was the great preacher of equality. Every man and woman has the same right to attain spirituality— that was his teaching. 
I would personally call India Buddhist India as it has imbibed all the values and virtues of the teachings of Buddha by their religious scholars incorporating them in their literature. 
When this highest tribute is paid by one of the great Hindu philosophers would it be wrong to call today’s Hinduism in quality and substance as Buddhist Hinduism? 
Buddha is the crown jewel of the Indian nation which accepts all ways of worship of all religions. This quality of Hinduism in India was a product of many great spiritual masters chief among them was Buddha. And this is what sustains the secular character of India. 
The Enlightenment which Buddha attained in Bodh Gaya also lit the light of enlightenment in Hinduism.
As the first Servant of this ancient nation I revere Buddha as a reformer of not only Hinduism but also the world, who has given all of us a new world view and vision which is critical for the survival of all of us and the entire world.
I recognise how Buddhists all over the world revere Bodh Gaya as a place of pilgrimage. We in India would like to develop Bodh Gaya so that it can become the spiritual capital and civilisational bond between India and the Buddhist world. The government of India would like to provide all possible support that its Buddhist cousin nations need for the satisfaction of their spiritual needs from this holiest of holy places for them.
I am happy to read the Declaration of Buddhist Religions and Spiritual Leaders. This declaration is the result of hardwork and extensive dialogue, which is why it is a pioneering document that will show us the way ahead. I also echo Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan, who the other day highlighted the importance of tolerance, appreciation of diversity, and spirit of compassion and fraternity. His message to this august gathering and his continuous support for
furthering this initiative is a matter of great strength for us.
Once again, my congratulations and best wishes to you all. This conference has raised a hope and urge to go beyond clash and create a dialogue framework for civilizational harmony and world peace. I wish you well in your constant and determined efforts to ensure that our wisdom reaches the future generations and that too in a manner in which they can practically relate to. This is essential not for us or them but for the progress of the entire human race and the beautiful surroundings
which we have got from Mother Nature.
Thank you very much. Thanks a lot.
#DELIMITER#
3 9 2015, India
samvad - global hindu buddhist initiative
Most Venerable Sayadaw Dr. Asin Nyanissara, Founder Chancellor, Sitagu International Buddhist Academy , Myanmar; 
Her Excellency Mrs Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga, former President of Sri Lanka; 
Mr. Minoru Kiuchi, State Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan 
Pujya Sri Sri Ravi Shankar ji; 
My Ministerial colleague Dr Mahesh Sharma and Kiren Rijiju ji; 
General N.C. Vij, Director Vivekananda International Foundation; 
Mr.Masahiro Akiyama President, The Tokyo Foundation, Japan; 
Lama Lobzang; 
Distinguished religious and spiritual leaders, Venerables from the Maha Sangha, Dharma Gurus, 
I am delighted to be here, at the inauguration of Samvad, the Global Hindu-Buddhist Initiative on Conflict Avoidance and Environment Consciousness. 
This is truly an esteemed gathering of spiritual leaders, scholars and leaders from several countries of the world where Buddhism is a prevalent way of life. 
It is a matter of immense happiness that this conference is being held in India, including in Bodh Gaya. India is the ideal venue to host a symposium of this nature. We in India are proud of the fact that it was from this land that Gautama Buddha gave the world the tenets of Buddhism. 
The life of Gautama Buddha illustrates the power of service, compassion and, most importantly, renunciation. He was born into privilege. The hardships he faced were relatively fewer. Yet, with age grew a distinct consciousness about human suffering, about illness, about old age and about death. 
He was convinced that material wealth is not the sole goal. Human conflicts repulsed him. And then, he set out, on the path to create a peaceful and compassionate society. In those days, he had the courage and conviction to hold a mirror to the society, and sought to break free from practices and systems seen as regressive. 
Gautam Buddha was a revolutionary. He nurtured a faith where a human being is at the core, nothing else. The innermost being of man manifests godliness. In a way, he created a faith without God, and a faith where divinity is not about looking anywhere outside, but about looking within. In three words, Appa Deepo Bhavah (अप्प दीपो भव) or be your own light, Gautam Buddha gave humanity the greatest management lesson. Nothing pained him more than mindless conflict that caused human
suffering. Non-violence was integral to his worldview. 
The message and teachings of Gautama Buddha resonate loudly and clearly with the major themes chosen for this symposium– the themes of avoiding conflicts, moving towards environmental consciousness and a concept of free and frank dialogue. 
The three themes may appear independent but they are not mutually exclusive. Infact, they are mutually dependent and supportive. 
The conflict in the first theme is among humans, religions, communities and nation-states, also between non-state actors and states, and even the world. Intolerant non-state actors now control large territories where they are unleashing barbaric violence on innocent people. 
The second conflict is between nature and man, between nature and development, and also between nature and science. These types of conflicts call for dialogue to bring about conflict avoidance – not just ‘give and take’ conflict resolution negotiations as what is happening today. 
Ethical values of personal restraint in consumption and environmental consciousness are deeply rooted in Asian philosophical traditions, especially in Hinduism and Buddhism. 
Buddhism, along with other faiths, such as Confucianism, Taoism and Shintoism, has undertaken greater responsibility to protect the environment. Hinduism and Buddhism with their well-defined treatises on Mother Earth can help examine the changes in approach that need to be made. 
Climate change is a pressing global challenge. It calls for a collective human action and a comprehensive response. In India, faith and Nature have had a deep link since ancient times. Buddhism and environment are deeply co-related. 
The Buddhist tradition, in all of its historical and cultural manifestations, encourages greater identification with the natural world because from a Buddhist perspective nothing has a separate existence. The impurities in the environment affect the mind, and the impurities of mind also pollute the environment. In order to purify the environment, we have to purify the mind. 
The eco crisis, in fact, is a reflection of imbalance of mind. Lord Buddha, therefore, accorded importance to the need for preserving natural resources, and created tools related to water conservation and forbid the monks from polluting water resources. The nature, forests, trees and the well-being of all beings play a great role in the teachings of Lord Buddha. 
I wrote a book ‘Convenient Action’ which was released by the former President of India, Dr. APJ Abdul Kalam. In my book I have shared my experiences of dealing with climate change as the Chief Minister. 
Personally, it is my reading of Vedic literature that educated me about the strong bond between humans and Mother Nature. We are all aware of Mahatma Gandhi’s Doctrine of Trusteeship. 
In this context, I want to say that we, the present generation, have the responsibility to act as a trustee of the rich natural wealth for the future generations. The issue is not merely about climate change; it is about climate justice. Again I repeat is not the issue of climate change, it is about climate justice. 
In my view, the most adversely affected by climate change are the poor and the downtrodden. When a natural disaster strikes, they are hit the hardest. When there are floods, they are rendered homeless; during a quake, their homes are destroyed; during droughts, they are affected; and during extreme cold too, the homeless suffer the most. 
We can’t let climate change keep affecting people in this manner. Which is why I believe the discourse must shift focus from climate change to climate justice. 
The third theme — promotion of dialogue – calls for a shift from ideological approach to a philosophic one. Without proper dialogue, neither of the two themes of conflict avoidance is possible, or workable. 
The severe limitations in our conflict resolution mechanisms are becoming more and more obvious. We need significant, collective and strategic efforts to prevent bloodshed and violence. It is, thus, no surprise that the world is taking note of Buddhism. This is also a recognition of the historical Asian traditions and values, which can be used to shift the paradigm to conflict avoidance, to move from the path of ideology to philosophy. 
The essence of the entire concept of this conference — including the first two themes conflict avoidance and environmental consciousness — is contained in the dialogue part of it which calls for a shift from the “them vs us” ideological approach to philosophic approach. It is necessary to inform the world about the need to shift from ideology — whether religious or secular — to philosophy. When I spoke at the Unite Nations last year, I briefly mentioned that the world needs to
shift from ideological approach to philosophic approach. A day later when I addressed the Council for Foreign Relations, I expanded on this concept a little more. The essence of philosophy is that it is not a closed thought, while ideology is a closed one. So philosophy not only allows dialogue but it is perpetual search of truth through dialogue. The entire Upanishad literature is a compilation of dialogue. Ideology only believes in unabated truth. So ideologies which close the gates
for dialogue have the propensity for violence while philosophy seeks to avoid it though dialogue. 
	Thus, Hindu and Buddhist religions are in that sense more philosophies and not just belief systems. 
	It is my firm belief that the solution to all problems lies in dialogue. Earlier, it was believed that force indicates power. Now, power must come through the strength of ideas and the effective dialogue. We have seen the adverse effects of war. The first half of the 20th century was witness to the horrors of two world wars. 
	Now, nature of warfare is changing and the dangers are increasing. What took a hundred thousand men or a prolonged battle can now happen through the click of a button, in a span of minutes. 
	All of us here have a cardinal duty to ensure that our future generations lead a life of peace, dignity and mutual respect. We need to sow the seeds of a conflict-free world and, in this endeavour, faiths of Buddhism and Hinduism have a great contribution. 
	When we talk about dialogue, what kind of dialogue should it be? It is dialogue which produces no anger or retribution. One of the greatest examples of such dialogue was the one between Adi Sankara and Mandana Mishra. 
	It is worth recalling and describing this ancient example for our modern times. Adi Sankara, a vedantic who did not give high marks for rituals, was a young man, while Mandana Mishra was an elderly scholar and high ritualist who believed even in animal sacrifice. 
	Adi Sankara wanted to establish through dialogue and debate with the highest authority on ritualism and that rituals were not necessary for attaining Mukti, while Mandana Mishra wanted to prove that Sankara was wrong in dismissing rituals. 
	This was how, in ancient India, debates on sensitive issues between scholars avoided such issues being settled in streets. Adi Sankara and Mandana Mishra held a debate and Sankara won. But the more important point is not the debate itself but how was the debate was conducted. It is a fascinating story that will ever remain one of the highest forms of debate for all times for humanity. 
	It was agreed that if Mandana Mishra lost, he would cease to be a householder (gruhasta) and accept sanyasa. If Adi Sankara lost, he would give up his sanyasa and marry and settle down as householder or in gruhasta life. Mandana Mishra, a high scholar, offered to Adi Sankara, who was young and therefore Mishra considered unequal, to choose a referee of his choice. Adi Sankara chose Mandana Mishra’s wife, a scholar herself, as the referee! If Mandana Mishra lost, she would lose
	her husband! But see what she did! She asked both Sankar and Mishra to wear fresh garlands and then begin the debate, and said that the one whose garland loses its freshness would be declared as the loser! Why? Because if one gets angry, the body will develop heat, and, as a result, the garland flowers will lose their freshness in that heat. Anger within is a sign of defeat. On this logic, Mandana Mishra was declared as having lost the debate! And he accepted sanyas and became a
	disciple of Sankara. This demonstrates the vitality of dialogue and that too dialogue without anger or conflict. 
		Today, in this august gathering, we are people of different nationalities, with different lifestyles, but what binds us is the fact that the roots of our civilisations are in our shared philosophies, history and heritage. Buddhism and Buddhist heritage have been a uniting and binding factor. 
		They say that this century is going to be an Asian Century . I am very clear that without embracing the path and ideals shown by Gautam Buddha, this century cannot be an Asian century! 
		I see Lord Buddha doing to our collective spiritual well-being what global trade did to our collective economic well-being and the digital internet did to our collective intellectual well-being. 
		I see Lord Buddha in the 21st Century across national borders, across faith systems, across political ideologies, playing the role of a bridge to promote understanding to counsel patience and to enlighten us with tolerance and empathy. 
		You are visiting a nation that is extremely proud of its Buddhist heritage. My hometown of Vadnagar in Gujarat is one of the many sites where Buddhist relics were found and was one of the places visited by Chinese traveller and chronicler, Xuanzang. 
		The SAARC region is home to the holy sites of Buddhism; Lumbini, Bodh Gaya, Sarnath, Kushinagar . These sites draw pilgrims from ASEAN nations, as also from China, Korea, Japan, Mongolia and Russia. 
		My Government is doing everything possible to give an impetus to this Buddhist heritage across India, and India is taking the lead in boosting the Buddhist heritage across Asia. This three-day meet is one such effort. 
		I hope the next three days are full of vibrant and rich discussions, and we are able to sit together and think about the way ahead towards peace, conflict resolution and a clean and green world. 
		I look forward to seeing you in Bodh Gaya the day after. 
		Thank You.
#DELIMITER#
30 8 2015, India
Mann ki baat
My dear countrymen, greetings to all of you! I have the opportunity to be amongst you to share my Mann Ki Baat once again. Far south, the people are engrossed in Onam festivities and yesterday the entire nation celebrated the holy festival of Raksha Bandhan. The government of India has launched various schemes of social security for the common man. I am happy that in a very short span of time all these schemes have been accepted in large numbers. 
I had made a humble request that on the occasion of Raksha Bandhan we give our sisters these insurance schemes as a gift. The preliminary information that I have, notifies me that from launch till date around 11 crore families have joined this scheme. And I have been told that almost half the beneficiaries are women, the mothers and the daughters. I consider this as a positive sign. I offer my best wishes to all mothers and sisters on this blessed occasion of Raksha Bandhan. 
Today when I talk to you, I want to mention that around a year back the Jan Dhan Yojana was started at a large scale. A task which could not be achieved in the past 60 years, would it be possible to achieve it in such a small span of time? Many questions were being raised but I am happy to tell you that all the units of the government and all the banks put in tremendous effort and as per my knowledge till date close to 18 crore people have opened their bank accounts, 17 crore 74
lakh to be precise. I saw the richness of the poor. They had to open zero balance accounts. But these poor people saved money and deposited a sum of 22,000 crores. Banks are the mainstream of the economy and to reach this facility to the homes of the poor, the programme of Bank Mitra is being strengthened. Today more than 1.25 lakh Bank Mitras are serving in the country. The youth have got employment this way. You will be pleased to know that in this one year to connect the
Banking sector, Economy and the Poor People, over 1 lakh 31 thousand Financial Literacy camps have been organized. One just does not have to open account and get stuck. Thousands of people under the Jan Dhan Yojana are now eligible to take an overdraft and they have availed it too. Now the poor have this faith that they too can get money from the bank. I would again like to congratulate all the people associated with this initiative and I would like to request the poor brethren
who have opened an account to never severe this relationship. These are your banks and now you should never leave them. I have brought them to you, now it is your job to keep them going. All of our accounts should be kept active. I have the faith that you will definitely continue operating the bank accounts. 
In the past few days the events in Gujarat, the violence unsettled the entire country. It is natural that if something of this sort happens in the land of Mahatma and Sardar Patel, then the nation is definitely shocked and hurt. But in a very short span of time, the intelligent brothers and sisters of mine in Gujarat brought the entire situation under control. They played an important role in preventing the situation form worsening further and once again Gujarat started its peaceful march.
Peace, unity and brotherhood is the right way forward. We have to walk together towards the path of development. Development is the key to our problems. 
Sometime back, I had the opportunity to meet the scholars of the Sufi tradition. I had the opportunity to hear them speak. And truly speaking of the experience and the manner in which they presented their views sounded as if some music was being played. Their choice of words, their way of talking, the generosity of the Sufi tradition, its sublimity, its lyricism, I could experience it all. I felt very nice. I think it has become imperative to present Islam in its true form to the world. I am
confident that the Sufi tradition which is associated with love and generosity will take this message far and wide and will thus benefit not only the humanity but also benefit Islam. And I would like to tell all that whatever faith one follows, we should definitely experience Sufism once. 
I am about to get another opportunity in the coming days and I consider myself fortunate to receive this invitation. Various Buddhist scholars from across the globe are coming together at Bodh Gaya and will discuss issues relating to humanity at a global level. I have been extended an invitation to be a part of this event and I am glad to be invited at Bodh Gaya. Pandit Nehru, the first Prime Minister of India visited Bodh Gaya. And now, I will be going there with these scholars, this
gives me immense happiness. 
My dear farmer brothers and sisters, today I would again like to especially share my Mann Ki Baat with you. I have already mentioned this in the previous sessions of Mann Ki Baat. You must have heard me speak in the parliament, in public forums or Mann Ki Baat about it. I have always said that the government is open to all views and suggestions on the issue of Land Acquisition Act, on which a debate is going on. I have reiterated again and again that I am open to any suggestion in the
interest of the farmers. But today, I want to tell all my farmer brothers and sisters that the request to reform the ‘Land Acquisition Act’ was raised by the states very emphatically. Everyone felt that if the welfare of the farmers is to be achieved, if the water has to reach the fields, if poles are to be erected to provide electricity, if roads have to be constructed in the village, if houses are to be made for the poor in the village, if employment opportunities are to be
provided to the poor youth of rural areas then we have to free the land from legal hassles and bureaucratic hurdles. And hence this reformed proposal was introduced. But I saw how the framers were being misled and a fear psychosis created. My dear farmers, you should not be misled and definitely never be scared. And I do not wish to give anyone the opportunity to mislead you and scare you. For me, every single voice in the nation is important but most important to me is the voice of the
farmer. We had issued an ordinance. Tomorrow, on August 31st the deadline for this ordinance ends. I have decided that let this ordinance be lapsed. This means that now same situation exists as it was prior to the formation of my government. But in the same act, there was a job which was incomplete. This job was related to 13 points which were to be completed within a year and so we brought the ordinance, but due to these disputes the issue got stuck. The ordinance is coming to
an end but those 13 points which were to benefit farmers which is directly connected to the monetary issues of the farmers will be made into a law and will be implemented today itself so that the farmers do not suffer any losses, especially monetary losses. And hence the task of implementing the 13 points which was left incomplete in the earlier act is being accomplished today. I want to reassure my farmer brothers and sisters that ‘Jai Jawan Jai Kisan’ is not merely a slogan, it
is our guiding Mantra. The guiding mantra is the welfare of the villages and the poor farmers. That is why I declared on 15th August that it is not just an agricultural department but an agricultural and farmer welfare department will be created. We are steadily working on it. So my dear farmers there is no need to be misled now and especially there is no need for you to fear anything. Do not be scared even if someone tries to scare you. 
I have to say something more. Two days back we completed the 50 years of the 1965 war. And whenever we talk of the 65 war it is natural that we remember Lal Bahadur Shastri. It is also but natural that we remember his slogan ‘Jai Jawan Jai Kisan’. It is also natural that we remember our Jawans who sacrificed their lives to maintain the pride and honour of our Tricolor Flag. I salute all those associated with the victory of the 1965 war. I pay my tribute to the brave soldiers. May
we continue to be inspired by such incidents of our history. 
Like I had the chance of meeting the Sufi scholars similarly I had another great experience. I had the opportunity to interact for hours with the distinguished scientists of the country. I had the opportunity to hear them and I was very happy to know that India is doing commendable research in the field of science. Our scientists are doing some excellent work. Now the challenge is to take these researches to the common man. How to convert these theories into machineries? How to
connect laboratory to the land? We have to take this forward as an opportunity. I got a lot of new information. I can say that it was both inspiring and educative experience for me. And I saw how the young scientists were eager to explain their work and their eyes were full of dreams. In the previous episode of Mann Ki Baat I had expressed the view that our students should be drawn towards science. After this meeting I felt that there are numerous options and endless possibilities.
I would like to reiterate once again that our young friends take interest in science and our educational institutions should also encourage the students for the same. 
I receive many letters from the citizens. Mr. Parimal Shah from Thane talks about educational reforms on my portal ‘MyGov.in’. They have written about Skill Development. Mr. Prakash Tripathi from Chidambaram in Tamil Nadu emphasizes the need for good teachers at primary level. They have emphasized on reforms in the educational set ups. 
I especially want to make a point to my young friends. I had mentioned from the Red Fort that why should there be interviews for the lower posts. And when they do get the interview letter - the poor, the widowed mother start thinking who to reach for recommendation, who can help get the job, whose jack could be useful to get that job. I do not know what all kind of words are being used? Every one rushes and that seems to be one reason for corruption at the lower levels. I
had mentioned in my speech on 15th August 2015 that this tradition of interview should at least end at some level. I am happy that in such a short span of time, it has just been 15 days but the government is moving at a very fast pace. Information is being disseminated and soon the decision will be enforced and small jobs will be made free of interviews. Now the poor will not have to run for recommendation. This will end exploitation and corruption. 
These days many guests from foreign countries have arrived in India. 24 countries from across the globe discussed on the Indian soil a ‘Call to Action’ to reduce Maternal Mortality and Infant Mortality rates. It was the first time that this programme was organized in any other country outside America. And it is true that in our country about 50,000 mothers and almost 13 lakh children die during delivery or immediately after it every year. This is a cause of worry and
these figures are scary. Although a lot of improvement has taken place. India is being appreciated at the International level for its efforts but this statistics is not low. Like we became polio free similarly we became free from tetanus as a cause of maternal and child mortality. The world has accepted this. But we still have to work to save our mothers and our children. 
Dear countrymen, there is news of dengue everywhere. It is true that dengue is dangerous but prevention of dengue is easier. It is directly related to the Swatch Bharat Campaign that I talk about. We watch the advertisement on TV but do not pay attention. There are advertisements in the newspapers but it escapes our attention. There are several ways of keeping the smallest thing in the household clean by using pure water. A lot of Public Education Programmes are being
conducted but we do not pay attention. We feel that we live in very good houses with proper arrangements being totally unaware that water is collecting at some location in the house and that we are inviting dengue. I would request you all that do not make death so cheap. Life is very precious. A little carelessness about cleanliness and accumulated water can cause death, which I believe is not right. In the entire country about 514 centers have facilities for testing dengue cases
absolutely free of cost. It is necessary to get ourselves tested on time to save precious lives. Cooperation from all of you is very important for this menace. And cleanliness should be given great importance. From Raksha Bandhan to Diwali there will be many festivals. Why don’t we associate each festival with cleaniness? You will see how a tradition becomes your habit. 
My dear countrymen I want to share good news with you. Like I said we may not get a chance to die for our nation, but we can be fortunate to live for the country. There are two young brothers and that too from Nashik in our own state of Maharashtra. Dr. Hitendra Mahajan and Dr. Mahendra Mahajan, both with a keen desire to help our tribal population. These two brothers have brought pride to the nation. In America a difficult cycle race of about 4800 kms known as Race Across America is
organized. This year both these brothers have won this race. They have made us proud. I would like to congratulate both these brothers and send my best wishes. But I was happier to know that they do all this for their campaign “Team India – Vision for Tribals”. See everyone is doing their bit for taking the country forward. And this it, when you hear such things the heart swells with pride. 
Sometimes we do injustice to our youth guided by a certain perception. The old generation feels that the new generation does not understand anything and I understand that this has been going on for ages. My experience regarding youth is different. Sometimes when we talk to the youth we learn so many things. I have met so many youth who have taken the pledge ‘Sunday on Cycle’. Some say that I keep one day a week as Cycle-Day as it is good for my health. It is good for the
environment. And I enjoy my youth too. Nowadays many cities in our country are witnessing cycle use and there are many people promoting its use. But this is a good initiative both for improving health and saving the environment. And today when two youths of my country made India proud in the US, I thought of it worth mentioning. 
Today I especially want to congratulate the Maharashtra government. It makes me happy. The task for erecting a memorial for Baba Sahib Ambedkar in the Indu Mill compounds had been stuck for long. The new government in Maharashtra completed this task and now a grand memorial will be erected which will inspire us to work for the dalits, exploited and the marginalized. But along with this, the house in UK where Baba Saheb lived – 10 King Henry Road has been purchased too. The
globetrotting Indians on their trip to UK can visit the memorial being erected by the Maharashtra government. It will be inspirational to many. I congratulate the Maharashtra government on the accomplishment of both these tasks. 
My dear brothers and sisters do share your views before the next Mann Ki Baat for I believe that democracy runs through public participation. We can take the nation forward when we work together. I send my best wishes to you. 
Thank You.
#DELIMITER#
27 8 2015, India
call to action summit
My colleague Shri J. P. Nadda, Minister of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India, Shri. Kesetebirhan Admasu, Minister of Health, Govt. of Ethiopia, Hon’ble Ministers from participating countries, representatives of Development Partners, friends from the civil society, the private sector, media, academia, national and international speakers and esteemed delegates. On behalf of my Government and all the co-hosts for this international summit, I warmly welcome you to the
Global Call to Action Summit 2015.
This is a landmark occasion, as for the first time, the Global Call to Action Summit is being held outside USA. My Government is honoured to host this Summit. All those delegates who have travelled a long distance to attend this Summit – I heartily welcome you to India and to New Delhi. I am delighted to be with you this morning. 
This two-day Summit, celebrating the achievements of the participating countries in the area of Maternal and Child Health, was conceptualized to accelerate joint leadership for ending preventable deaths among mothers and children. It will showcase the power of new partnerships, innovations and systems to bring about improvements in life-saving interventions. I firmly believe that this Summit will provide a highly effective platform to address common challenges that will
help us achieve the desired goals. 
How we shape the world in the next 15 years will make the difference between prosperous, optimistic nations, and insecurity and unrest. I am glad to see 24 nations present here to join together in their commitment to end preventable maternal and child death. This is a “Call to Action” to all of us to seize this opportunity and think big.
Today, as we gather here to discuss strategies and as we transit from the Millennium Development Goals to Sustainable Development Goals, let us acknowledge the sad reality that the world continues to lose about 289 thousand mothers and 6.3 million under-5 children every year. The 24 priority countries participating in the Summit contribute nearly 70% of the preventable maternal and child deaths. For India, with its birth cohort of 26 million, the challenges are formidable but
the commitment to succeed is also as strong. What, however, does offer hope is that most of these deaths can be prevented through simple yet effective and proven interventions. This forms the key peg for this Summit. This also formed a crucial part of the joint statement issued subsequent to the visit of the US President in January this year, where we agreed to further accelerate the joint leadership to end all preventable maternal and child deaths. 
Keeping aside the work that still needs to be done, there have been significant achievements on the global front in the area of maternal and child health. Looking at the big picture, we find that in 1990, India’s under-five mortality rate stood at 126 while the global average was 90. In 2013, this figure dropped to 49 against a global average of 46. Therefore, the gap to the global average reduced from 36 points in 1990, to just 3 points in 2013 reflecting that India has achieved
under-five mortality rate decline at an accelerated pace compared to global rate of decline. What this translates into is this: India is likely to reach close to achieving the MDG target if the current trend of annual decline is sustained.
In addition to this remarkable achievement, another truly historic accomplishment has been the victory over Polio. India was declared as “Polio-Free” on 27 March 2014. From being a country which accounted for more than half of the global polio cases in 2009, to being declared free of the wild polio virus: the journey reflects India’s deep commitment to child health.
I am also happy to share with you today another major milestone achieved by India. India has eliminated maternal and neonatal tetanus. The validation for this has happened much before the global target date of December 2015. This gives us the confidence to achieve other targets well before the target date.
To sustain the efforts of being a Polio-free and maternal and neonatal tetanus free nation, and to accelerate the full immunization coverage in the country, my Government has added to the world’s largest immunization drive another mission known as “Mission Indradhanush”. It focusses on vaccinating the left-outs. It also targets to accelerate the current increase in annual rate of immunization from existing 1% to more than 5% per year. This will help us achieve more than 90% coverage by
2020, which otherwise would take more than 25 years at the current pace. The first phase has been successfully implemented. We want to ensure that no child in India dies of a vaccine-preventable disease.
India has always partnered with the global efforts on issues of child and maternal health. India is the first country to respond to the global commitment to reduce newborn mortality, subsequent to the launch of Global Every Newborn Action Plan (ENAP) at the World Health Assembly in June 2014. India launched the India Newborn Action Plan (INAP) in September 2014, targeting reduction in Neonatal Mortality Rate (NMR) and still births to single digit by 2030. India also responded by
acting on the first “Call to Action” through its commitment and launch of RMNCH+A. 
These remarkable successes in the field of maternal and child health have been possible through our National Health Mission (NHM). The Mission, with its urban and rural health components – perhaps one of the largest public health programmes in the world – has resulted in improved health outcomes. 52% of India’s under-5 mortality is contributed to by deaths of newborns in the first month of life. Under the NHM, our approach emphasises a continuum of newborn care both at the community
and facility level. 
Our focus has been to get pregnant women to have safe delivery in our institutions. We launched an ambitious program – Janani Suraksha Yojana (JSY) – wherein incentives were given for delivering in public institutions to the beneficiaries directly. As a result, today, more than 75% of the deliveries take place in our institutions. This has directly contributed to reduction in maternal mortality. We are fully aware that out-of-pocket expenses remain a key barrier for
women to access timely health care and services. To overcome this, we have launched a programme called Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakram (JSSK) under which every woman delivering in a public health institution as well as the newborn is entitled to free and cashless health services, with an assured provision of free drugs, diagnostics and diet besides free to and fro transport. This has helped to further improve our institutional deliveries.
Not only are the mothers provided focused health services, but individual beneficiary tracking is being done through the countrywide Maternal and Child Health Tracking System, which ensures close tracking of inputs and outputs at the level of service provision. More than 92 million mothers and 78 million children have already been registered so far in the system. 
One of our major concerns is equity. As a step towards ensuring equitable health services across regions that suffer from intra-state disparities, and to bring about sharper improvements in health outcomes, a total of 184 poorest performing districts all over the country have been identified. Special efforts are being made to put in more resources and focussed programmes in these areas.
One of the flagship programmes of my Government is the ‘Swacch Bharat Abhiyaan’ (The Clean India Campaign) . As a part of this large campaign, the Health Ministry has launched the Kayakalp scheme to encourage public health facilities to maintain high standards of hygiene and sanitation, as I firmly believe that clean and hygienic environment is the stepping stone to a healthy nation. To save and educate the girl child we have launched an ambitious program – Beti bachao Beti padhao.
We need to ensure that the girl child survives, thrives and plays a very crucial role in society. 
I have witnessed people getting poorer because of unfortunate health episodes. We need to institutionalise a system where marginalised communities receive universal health care and financial protection. We must experiment and learn from each other. India stands ready to boost its commitment and partner with other countries and move forward on our promise to end maternal and child deaths and provide a better life to the adolescent. I invite you, to commit to bold measures and hold
each other accountable to these promises.
As we assemble here, we need to send a very very strong message not only to ourselves, not only to the 24 countries present here, but to the entire world. The message is of our commitment, that we will ensure that every woman, every child who can be saved will be saved. We also need to make a clarion call to the world to join hands in taking such steps that would ensure this. India stands committed to not only allocate resources towards this in our country, but also to help
the world and all those countries which needed any support. It is my personal vision and my Government’s firm commitment. 
While every country present here has something to offer, India also has a wealth of experience. India has done well in many ways and would be extremely happy to share its experience with other countries. Last year, I had made a commitment of assisting the SAARC countries in keeping it Polio free. We have also made a commitment to provide Pentavalent vaccines to such SAARC countries as would need it. We will offer whatever experience we have to the world community. 
India would be happy to assist any country with technology, system strengthening and programme implementation capsules. We could train personnel and skill them for better management of child sickness in our Special Newborn Care Units (SNCUs) as well as share our experience at home based new born care. India’s rich experience in Universal immunization and particularly its experience this year with the Mission Indradhanush could be shared with all the countries. We had offered
this to SAARC countries earlier. Today I repeat this offer to all countries present here. This will be apart from our offer of support for Polio eradication. 
I again warmly welcome you all to this important international Summit. I hope the next two days would provide a new direction to the global community in its journey towards ending maternal and child deaths. 
I wish you a pleasant stay in New Delhi. 
Thank you very much. Jai Hind!
#DELIMITER#
26 8 2015, India
Joint statement with president michel of seychelles
His Excellency, President Michel, 
Members of the Media,
It is always a great pleasure to welcome home a special friend, which President Michel certainly is.
I am also delighted to reciprocate President Michel’s exceptional hospitality in March, this year.
He has led his country with great vision. He is a strong global voice of concern on climate change, especially for small island countries.
Excellency, just as we appreciate your country’s beauty, we admire your nation’s progress.
Let me repeat what I said in Seychelles: Your country shows that size is no barrier to the scale of achievements.
President Michel has also been instrumental for the progress in our relationship. We value this greatly because Seychelles is a key strategic partner for India.
Just as the range of our interests are broad, so are the foundations of our relationship deep – our shared values, ties of kinship, unmatched mutual respect and trust, and a partnership of equality.
I am pleased that we are making good progress on the decisions from my very productive visit in March. President Michel’s visit has imparted additional momentum to our relations.
We have excellent security cooperation, especially for maritime security in the Indian Ocean Region.
We are honoured to be a partner in providing aircraft, naval vessels and coastal radar systems for strengthening surveillance capacities. Our cooperation in hydrography surveys is extensive and growing.
I have conveyed that India will gift one more Interceptor Coastguard boat to Seychelles.
In March, I had announced that we would gift a second Dornier aircraft to Seychelles. I am pleased that we have completed the process quickly and signed the agreement today.
President and I place strong emphasis on Ocean or Blue Economy. I believe, as he does, that we should look at small island countries as large ocean states with vast potential.
We are pleased that sustainable use of oceans and marine resources is a distinct element in the Sustainable Development Goals in the United Nations that were finalised recently.
Our bilateral agreement for cooperation on blue economy is a huge step forward in our relationship and in promoting sustainable ocean economy in the region.
We look forward to cooperating in Space, including in the areas of managing land and marine resources, fisheries advisory, weather forecasting and disaster management.
We have begun preparations for infrastructure development on the Assumption Island in Seychelles.
We had spoken in March about improving connectivity. The Air Services Agreement today will enable more and easier connections between the two countries.
Climate change is a major global challenge. It is a serious threat to island countries like Seychelles. With a shoreline of 7500 kilometres and nearly 1300 islands, India has similar concerns.
We both have ambitious national plans for a more sustainable future. We also work together for a comprehensive, balanced and effective outcome on climate change at COP 21 in Paris later this year.
I shared our desire to press for reforms of the United Nations, including its Security Council, in this 70th anniversary year.
We greatly appreciate Seychelles’ support for India’s candidature for permanent membership of an expanded United Nations Security Council.
I also conveyed our desire to work with Small Island Developing States to realise their vision of Samoa Pathway and to be a source of strength for each other in international forums.
I thank President Michel for his support for the Third India-Africa Forum Summit to be held in October.
Let me also express our gratitude to Seychelles for their active support in making the International Day of Yoga a big success.
Excellency, we are two nations of vastly different sizes. But, this relationship is an outstanding model of international partnership. This special and unique relationship will always be at the centre of our interests.
I am confident that this milestone year for our relationship will be the springboard for taking our strategic partnership to a new level.
Thank you very much.
#DELIMITER#
21 8 2015, India
forum for india pacific island countries - closing remarks, jaipur
Excellencies, 
Thank you very much for your thoughts and recommendations on our global challenges and our bilateral cooperation. Your perspectives are very important to us. 
Let me reassure you that we will remain very sensitive to your concerns in international forums. We would also like to shape our bilateral cooperation in accordance with your needs and priorities. 
Let me share my thoughts with you on a few global issues and propose a few initiatives for our cooperation. 
Climate change is clearly a pressing concern for all. Combating it is India’s national priority. We make this choice with the natural instinct of our heritage and culture. But, we also do this in our enlightened self-interest and with a commitment to the future of our planet. 
That is why we have set a target of additional capacity of 175 GW of renewable energy by 2022. National action will succeed only through a strong international partnership. As much as we speak of goals and emission reductions, we should focus equally on access to affordable technology and adequate finance that makes transition to clean energy natural and easy. Otherwise, experience shows that targets will remain difficult dreams. We must equally seek a global commitment to support
adaptation to the growing impact of climate change on our lives and economy. 
India will work with you and others for a comprehensive, balanced and fair outcome at COP 21 in Paris. 
Your interests will have the strength of our voice. 
Excellencies, 
As I mentioned in my opening remarks, reforms of the UN Security Council is in global interest and vital for a more inclusive and equitable world. 
As I said before, we should quickly adopt the draft presented by the President of the General Assembly as the negotiating text and conclude negotiations during the 70th Session of the General Assembly. Excellencies, 
As I said, you are large ocean states. We look forward to working with you to realise the full potential of our oceans in a sustainable manner. 
We would be pleased to establish an Institute for Sustainable Coastal and Ocean Research in the region and a network of marine biology research stations in various island nations. We could begin immediately with research collaboration and capacity building with institutions in India. 
We also propose to hold an International Conference on “Ocean economy and Pacific Island Countries” in New Delhi in 2016. We will be delighted to host officials and independent experts of all 14 Pacific Island Countries. 
Indian Navy has provided direct support and capacity building to island states in Indian Ocean, especially for coastal surveillance and hydrographic surveys. This has helped them get a better understanding of their maritime zone and strengthen security of their EEZs. We would be prepared to extend this assistance to our Pacific Island partners. 
We also look forward to goodwill visits by Indian Navy to Pacific Islands. The ships could also extend support in areas like healthcare through medical camps on the islands. 
Not only is our future closely linked to Space and Oceans, there is also a close relationship between the two. 
Space assets and technology can help us in inventory of land and water resources; fish zoning; forest resources management; coastal and ocean studies; weather and climate change; and, disaster management support. 
We can assist in establishing a ‘Space Technology Applications Centre’ in any one of the Pacific Island Countries for the entire region and enhance our support for training in space applications, including through customized courses. 
Fiji’s support was invaluable for our Mars Mission. We hope to continue receiving support from Pacific Islands for Telemetry, Tracking and Command for our missions in the future. 
We are all increasingly vulnerable to natural disasters, but we can reduce their human impact. 
India will be pleased to create capacity in Island States to deal with natural disasters, including through human resource development and application of space technology for early warning system and incident response. 
Human resource development has been a key area of cooperation. There is no other form of cooperation that is as effective in building a nation’s future. 
For the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation training programme, Fiji will get 110 slots, and the number of slots for the other 13 countries will be doubled from 119 to 238. 
In addition, we will offer two scholarships for college education in India to each of the 13 countries that do not receive them yet, while continuing with the 33 scholarships presently offered to Fiji. 
We will expand our training courses for Pacific Island diplomats and, in addition, offer a two-week business management course at the globally renowned Indian Institute of Management in Bengaluru. 
During the last three years, India has trained 43 rural women from 8 island countries as solar engineers. We now commit to train 70 women solar engineers and to provide solar electrification to 2,800 houses - 200 houses in each Pacific Island Country. This will save kerosene worth about a million US dollars and provide livelihood to women. 
I am pleased to announce that we will establish at least one information technology laboratory in each Pacific Island country. This will not only improve local IT infrastructure, it will enable us to fulfill our commitment to provide tele-medicine and tele-education to the people. 
We are prepared to do more to strengthen our trade. In addition to the FIPIC Trade Office in New Delhi, we can support the development of micro, small and medium enterprises and will extend support for purchase of machinery for coconut processing and enhancing rice and sugarcane yields. 
We will also improve market access for Small Islands Developing States. We will focus on developing capacity for health services in your countries. 
Supply of generic drugs from India is presently routed through third countries and are, therefore, very expensive. We are ready to set up a pharmaceutical manufacturing plant and distribution centre in the Pacific Island region and are pleased to offer a Line of Credit for this project. 
Human bonds are the strongest foundation for enduring relations between nations. 
Last year, we had announced electronic visas for Pacific Island countries. I am pleased to announce that we have decided to provide gratis visa to the nationals of Pacific Island countries. 
Prasar Bharti, India’s national broadcaster is happy to gift television and radio programmes on culture, entertainment, news, education, etc., in English and Hindi to your countries. Prasar Bharati also proposes to organise a specialised training programme over the next few months for broadcasters from the Pacific Island Countries. 
We will also support creation of India Centres through e-libraries and supply books to libraries at universities in your countries. 
Excellencies, 
In the short time together, we have made concrete progress. Together, we are highlighting the value of relationships, based on goodwill, respect and concern for each other. This partnership demonstrates that geography is no barrier to productive partnerships of convergent interests and shared challenges. This partnership will be of great relevance to all of us in the 21st century. 
Your support to this partnership means a lot to India. We see this as a partnership of equals, driven by similar aspirations, in which we will all be more successful by being together. 
It stems from our belief in VasudhaivaKutumbakam – the world is one– and from the conviction that in sharing what we have, we enrich each other and make this world a better place. 
It is a great honour to have you with us. I hope you have had an enjoyable visit to India. We hope that this would inspire you to visit us more often. 
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
21 8 2015, India
forum for india pacific island countries - opening remarks, jaipur
Excellencies, 
It is truly a great honour and privilege to host you in India for the second Summit of Forum for India Pacific Islands Cooperation – FIPIC, as it is called now. 
I am deeply grateful to you for coming to India. I am aware that the journey is not short and you have busy schedules. But, I also know that familiarity shrinks distances. 
I was pleased to join our President in greeting you in Delhi yesterday. I hope you have enjoyed Delhi, Agra and Jaipur and that our team let you shop a bit. 
I hope you liked your visit to Taj Mahal. 
If you are visiting India for the first time, I am sure you are struck by the size, the culture, the diversity and the sea of people, like we are wonderstruck at the thought of a nation living as a small community in harmony with Nature on a beautiful island! 
It is this diversity that makes our planet so special!
I especially welcome you in this historic city of Jaipur. The Pink City is known for the pink sandstones of its famous palaces. It is a city of heroism and valour, of art and heritage, and, above all, a strong tradition of hospitality. 
I thank Chief Minister Smt Vasudhara Raje for her generous support. 
This is the first regional summit that I am hosting in India. This one will always remain very special for me. 
It is also special because India and Pacific Island Countries are setting an example of partnerships for this century. 
It is a partnership forged by shared aspirations and challenges. It is shaped by the belief that all nations, small and large, have equal stakes in this world. 
We also recognise that a globalised world has deepened inter-dependence and changed our perception of geography. 
In particular, the centre of gravity of global opportunities and challenges are shifting to the Pacific and Indian Ocean Region. The fortunes of nations in and around the two oceans are inter-linked. 
For this reason, the tides that bear hopes and bring challenges to the shores in India and the Pacific Islands are the same. 
That is why some call the region the Indo-Pacific Region. 
But that is not all that brings us together. 
Small Island States may add up to small land area and even smaller population. But, they are as important for us as any other nation. We have and will stand with you in international forums. 
It is with this sense of solidarity that we made the strongest contribution to the SIDS Conference in Samoa last year, which led to the evolution of the Samoa Pathway. 
We also supported the interests of SIDS on capacity building in the latest outcome document on the Post-2015 Development Agenda. 
India stands shoulder to shoulder with you for a dedicated seat for SIDS in an expanded and reformed United Nations Security Council in both categories. 
India will support the realisation of your vision of Pacific Regionalism. It is a shining example of cooperative regionalism that should inspire others around the world. 
Excellencies, the world may see you as Small Islands with modest populations. I see you as Large Ocean States with vast potential. 
Some of you have Exclusive Economic Zones that are larger than the landmass and Exclusive Economic Zone of India taken together. 
We are at the cusp of a new era, where oceans, like Space, will become important drivers of our economies. Their sustainable use can bring prosperity; and, give us clean energy, new medicines and food security beyond just fisheries. 
Ocean is critical to India’s future, too. That is why, in the past year, I have focused a lot on ocean economy, both in India and international engagement. I see huge potential for our cooperation in this area. 
India was pleased to stand with you in ensuring that sustainable use of oceans and marine resources constitute a distinct element in the Sustainable Development Goals in the United Nations that were finalised recently. 
Our global challenges are similar. 
Climate change is an existential threat to the Pacific Islands. It is also taking a toll on the teaming millions on India’s shoreline of 7500 kilometres and its nearly 1300 islands. We both seek a concrete and effective outcome on climate change at COP 21 in Paris later this year. 
We worked together for a separate goal on climate change in the Sustainable Development Goals, and in a manner that addresses the interests of developing countries. 
We must also build closer partnership in pursuit of our shared aims in the WTO-for example on fisheries. 
The United Nations is at a historic milestone of its 70th anniversary. I have written to all member states on charting the course for the United Nations for the years ahead. 
Seven decades after the United Nations was created, the world is a different place. We have four times as many nations. We have new challenges like climate change. We have new frontiers like Space and Ocean. We live in a globalised world with a transformed economy in a digital age. The United Nations must keep pace with the changing world.
We must press for reform in the United Nations Security Council to ensure its relevance and effectiveness in the 21st century. We seek your support for the text of the President of the General Assembly as a basis for reforming the Security Council. 
Your voice of support for India’s permanent membership of the Security Council will give the United Nations the global character and balance that mirrors our age. 
Excellencies, 
just as FIPIC should become our springboard for a stronger global partnership, we can also enrich each other through our bilateral and regional cooperation. 
During the last Summit, India announced a number of new initiatives with the Pacific Islands countries. I am pleased that we have been able to deliver on many of our commitments. 
These include increasing India’s grant-in-aid to Pacific Island countries from 125,000 to 200,000 U.S. dollars, e-tourist visas, deputation of Indian experts in the area of coir industry and a special training programme for diplomats of the Pacific Island countries. 
Trade, more than aid, is the enabler for development. I am pleased to announce the establishment of the FIPIC Trade Office in the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry in New Delhi. 
This is just the first step towards promoting trade and investment opportunities between India and Pacific Island countries. 
Excellencies, people of Indian origin in many of your countries provide a special human link between us. 
Excellencies, I eagerly look forward to hearing your views. I will also share my thoughts on our future initiatives to take this wonderful partnership forward. 
I want to say a special word of thanks for your support for the record-breaking adoption of International Day of Yoga by the United Nations, and for making the first International Day of Yoga a grand success in your countries. 
In conclusion, I wish to say that the world is more magnificent for the rich gems of island states. And, life on these islands is a beautiful proof of God’s will and human spirit. 
We will work together to sustain and nurture some of Nature’s most precious gifts and some of this world’s most wonderful people. 
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
15 8 2015, India
Independence day
Prime Minister: My Beloved 125 Crore countrymen of India,
My best wishes and heartiest greetings on the occasion of this sacred festival of our Freedom. This morning of the 15th of August is not a usual morning. This is the dawn of the freedom-festival of the greatest democracy of the world. This dawn is also the dawn of the dreams of the one hundred twenty five Crore Indian Citizens. This dawn also heralds the resolve of 125 Crore people of India. On this pious occasion I also extend my many many salutations to all those great
persons of India who sacrificed their lives and led a life of penance while making persistent efforts to fight for the honour of the country. They even spent their youth in the prison, went through all kinds of sufferings; but never gave up their dreams and resolve to see India free.
Recently many distinguished citizens of India, youths, literary artists and social workers- sons and daughters of Mother India- have achieved many great feats to make our country proud. They are countless in number and from the ramparts of Red fort I extend my best wishes and greetings to all of them from the core of my heart. 
The vastness and the diversity of India is always talked about, but Our India has many other great characteristics as well, there is a lot of diversity in India. India is a large country. And there is simplicity among the people of India. There is unity running through all the parts of the country and that is what is our strength; the strength of our nation. Strength of our country has been sustained over centuries together. Every era has seen the attempts to boost it further. They
have been moulded according to the requirements of realising the dreams for the future, they have been nurtured and it is due to that only that this country has reached this far with our age old traditions and ever new resolves. Our unity, simplicity, fraternity, harmony are our biggest strength. This strength should never be blemished, it should never be hit. If the unity of the country gets disturbed, the dreams also get shattered, therefore, whether it is the poison of casteism,
communal fanaticism, we don’t have to allow it in any form whatsoever, not allow it to take root, and then we have to cure the poison of casteism, the fanaticism of communalism with the nectar of development, distribute the flow of the nectar of development and through the flow of this nectar attempt bringing about a new awareness.
Dear brothers and sisters, this country is moving ahead because of the "Team India" and this "Team India" is a big team of our one twenty five crore countrymen. The world might never have thought about the team of one twenty five crore citizens working as a team together as to how they take the nation to new heights, build the nation and also protect it! So, whatever we are doing and wherever we are trying to reach, it is all because of the "Team India" and we are grateful to this
"Team India". People’s participation is the biggest strength of democracy. If we run the country through the participation of One Hundred and twenty five crore Indians, our country will be moving ahead one hundred and twenty five crore steps every moment. That is why we have encouraged this people's participation as "Team India". We have given priority to "Team India". Through electronic platform mygov.in, through lacs of letters of the countrymen, through my Mann Ki Baat, through
dialogues with citizens, this people’s participation is on the rise day by day. About every affair of the Government we receive a number of suggestions from the far flung villages of our country and this is the real strength of our "Team India".
My dear fellow citizens, this is a fact that there is only one mandate of this "Team India" and that is all our schemes, all our systems should benefit the poor of the country. We should support the poor in their fight against poverty and empower them in this arduous effort of theirs because no one wants to remain poor and they also wish to get rid of poverty. Hence the meaningfulness of our resources, our schemes and our programmes is in their usefulness to the cause of
welfare of the poor.
Brothers and sisters, last year on the occasion of 15th of August, I had expressed some of my views before you. At that time I was new, whatever I saw in the government, I expressed them with an open mind before one hundred and twenty five crore citizens. Today after one year, standing under the Tricolor from the same ramparts of the Red Fort , I assure the countrymen that in this period of one year our "Team India", consisting of one hundred and twenty five crore people, is
committed to realize our dreams within the timeframe with new hope, new energy and utmost hard work. An atmosphere of trust has emerged. I had announced ‘Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojna’ on the last 15th of August. Even after sixty years of independence; even when the banks were nationalized for the poor, 40% people of the country were without a bank account till the last 15th of August; the doors of the banks were not open for the poor. We resolved that we would erase this blot and
would provide a solid base to the financial inclusion which is talked about the world over, by integrating the poorest of the poor to the mainstream economic activities; and this is only the beginning. We had decided that unlike the previous work culture of talking in terms of uncertain time frames, we will complete the work by the 26th of January as the country celebrates the next Republic Day.
My countrymen, today I can proudly say that we achieved that target within the time frame. 17 Crore people opened their bank accounts under ‘Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojna’. With a view to extend opportunities to the poor, we had said that these bank accounts could be opened with zero balance. We had even said that we would bear the operational costs of the bank. After all, what for the banks exist? They should be for the poor and that’s why we had decided to open accounts with zero
balance. We have seen the rich of our country; however, this time around we have also seen our poor and seen their wealth. From the ramparts of the Red Fort, let me salute and bow to the large-heartedness of these poor; because even if there was a provision of opening the account with zero balance, these poor people have deposited twenty thousand crore rupees in their bank accounts. It could be possible only due to richness of our poor citizens. And hence, today my conviction bears
proof that it is all because of the spirit of these poor that this "Team India" will march ahead.
Brothers and sisters, if the branch of a bank is opened or a building of the bank is constructed in a certain part of our country, it becomes the hot topic of discussion, people rejoice, it is hailed as a mark of great development and remarkable progress. This is so because in the past 60 years, we have measured the development of the country only on the basis of these parameters. This has been the yardstick that if any branch of a bank is opened somewhere, it elicits lots
of accolades and praises, the Government receives much adulation, but my dear fellow citizens, it is not a challenging task to open a branch of a bank. This task can easily be accomplished through the Government exchequer, but to bring 17 crore countrymen to the doorstep of the bank is an arduous task, it takes a lot of hard work, you have to give your heart and soul to accomplish this task, you are required to be ever vigilant. And here I would extend my heartfelt
congratulations to various Banks and their employees who have been a very significant part of "Team India". I congratulate them for making banks so easily accessible to the poor and this fact will bring a major change in the coming days.
Among the global economic schools of thought, there is also the one which maintains that financial inclusion doesn’t always bring positive results and due to that the system has to bear the pressure of poverty. I disagree with this thought. In a country like India, if we look at the pyramid of development, its base is the broadest. If it be firm, the entire pyramid of development tends to be strong. Today the downtrodden, the exploited, oppressed, deprived, and the ignored ones of
our country form the base of the pyramid of development. We have to strengthen the foundation of this pyramid of development so as to ensure that these people are empowered through financial inclusion and this pyramid of development remains unshakable. It would stand firm amid any crisis and if this pyramid of development is based on economic strength, it would increase the purchasing power of these people to a great extent. And when the purchasing power of the poorest of
the poor in the society increases, nobody can stop that economy to flourish and move ahead. It takes the country swiftly to the newer heights of development and therefore it is our intention to give impetus to that. We have laid great stress upon social security and also the welfare of the poor - and thus Prime Minister's Suraksha Bima Yojana, Atal Pension Yojana and Prime Minister's Jeevan Jyoti Bima yojana have been launched. Crores of the people of our country have no
social security cover. Leave the poor aside, benefit of insurance has not reached even the lower middle class. So we made a plan - just pay one rupee per month, not more, that is just Rs. 12 per annum and be entitled to the benefits of Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana. If your family faces any calamity then they will receive 2 lac rupees. We know how to manage an economy ! That's why we launched Prime Minister's Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana for 90 paisa a day, even less than 1 rupee. So it
is Rs. 330 annually for the health of one's family - and for the security of one's family- insurance of 2 lac rupees. This is what we have done. 
Brothers and sisters, schemes have been made in the past also. There is no Government which doesn't make schemes. Every Government does that. There is no government which doesn't make announcements. Every Government does that. There is no government which doesn't light the inauguration lamps, doesn't cut ribbons--every Government does that. But the touchstone is whether we walk the talk or not. We have laid a great stress upon a new work culture. Dear Countrymen, our nation has many
schemes which are 40 years old or 50years old but these schemes could not reach more than 5 or 7 crore people. This scheme has just completed a hundred days, 100 days! I mean it, and in these hundred days ten crore citizens have been benefited 10 crore people! Ten crore citizens of this country means ten crore families. And this means that out of total 30-35 crore families of our country, ten crore families have joined this scheme within a span of hundred days.
Brothers and sisters, the uniqueness of our government, of "Team India", during last one year, especially the great strength and the biggest achievement of "Team India", consisting of one hundred and twenty five crore people has been to fulfill the tasks within the set time frame. 
Last year I referred to toilet facilities for all from this Red Fort, I also referred to cleanliness. It sounded strange to the whole country for a few hours as to what sort of Prime Minister is this! But today in all the surveys that has been carried out in the entire country, this point has come out in all of them that if there is something that is the most important factor of "Team India" and that has touched every person, is the movement towards cleanliness. 
Brothers and sisters, we used to invoke the people of the society and marked the names of various people to promote the "cleanliness drive". That was such a period, but today I have to congratulate this "Team India". People from all walks of life whether they are Celebrities, Diplomats, Social Workers, Educationists, community leaders or spiritual leaders or our friends from media, all of them have taken a major responsibility to train the common man without criticising
anybody and without pointing towards the lacunas. Today I greet them all from the core of my heart who have done this job but I only wish to stress upon a point- from whom this "Swachh Bharat" drive has gained maximum strength? Who are its biggest brand ambassador? You may not have paid heed to it, but try to remember what happened in your family? There are crores of such families in India, whose children are in the age group of five, ten and fifteen and they have become the greatest
ambassador of "Swachh Bharat Abhiyaan". These children prevent their parents from littering in their homes and ask them to avoid spreading filth and rubbish here and there. In case, any father is addicted to consuming gutka and whenever the father opens the windows of the car to spit, his son prevents him to do so on the plea of keeping India clean. The success of this programme is due to those little children. I wish to bow my head towards the future of my country, I wish to bow my
head and greet those children. The fact which is not realized even by the elite people has been easily understood by the innocent children and it is my belief that such a country where a child is so much aware, so committed towards cleanliness, such country is bound to become clean; Abhorrence against filth and dirt is bound to arise there.
In 2019 we are about to celebrate the 150th anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi and on 150th anniversary of Gandhiji we have to handover him "Swachh Bharat" as a tribute. There cannot be a greater tribute to Mahatma Gandhi on his 150th birth anniversary. The task has just started, but I have to take it forward, not to stop it, not get to satisfied. I had announced such a programme from here, just for a trial, so that I could ascertain whether "Team India" is able to do it or
not. I had announced it without consulting anybody. It was not announced after collecting relevant information from districts and villages. It just came into my heart and I had announced that we would build separate toilets for boys and girls in all of our schools till the next 15th August. But later on, when we started work, the "Team India" figured out its responsibilities, we realised that there were 2 lakh and 62 thousand such schools, where more than 4.25 lakh toilets were
required to be built. This figure was so big that any government could rethink to extend the deadline, but it certainly was the resolve of the '"Team India"' that no one sought any extension. Today, on this 15th August, I salute the "Team India", who, keeping the honour of our tricolour National Flag, left no stone unturned to realise that dream, and the '"Team India"' has now nearly achieved the target of building all the toilets. I compliment to all the state governments, government
officers of the districts, policy framers and implementers of educational institutions, who were involved in realising this achievement. This is not just an issue of building more than 4.25 lakh toilets. This is an issue of creating an atmosphere of self-confidence at a time, when we were so engulfed with the negativity that it was being told that nothing could happen, there was no hope, it was not possible. But now, the "Team India" has demonstrated that we are ready to accept
challenges, we would not withdraw, and we are committed for our success. The nation runs on this self-confidence, the nation runs by realising newer resolutions. We cannot stop anywhere, we have to continuously move forward. Therefore, Brothers and Sisters, we have prepared a plan for the labourers of our country, and it has been named as "SHRAMEVA JAYATE". Our attitude towards the poor labourers is not good. 
If we meet a person wearing coat, pants, tie or we meet a great person wearing long kurta, jacket we salute him by standing in his honour. But if an auto rickshaw driver, pedal rickshaw puller, newspaper vendor or a milkman come to us, our feelings towards these poor men are not proper. One hundred and twenty five crore citizens of the country have to remove this deficiency of the nation by their resolution of mind. The persons due to whom we look good, who serve us good, no one is
our better well wisher than them and therefor, dignity of labourers, honour of labourers, pride of labourers- this should be our national duty , this should be our national character, this should be the tendency of everyone, nature of everyone. Recently, we started a campaign of issuing special identity card to the unorganized labour falling under certain schemes. They are to get the benefits of many schemes of security through that identity card. These unorganized labourers
were never taken care of. Similarly, labourers of our country had deposited their share of hard earned money in Government coffers. Slowly, this amount grew to Rs. 27 thousand crores, but when that poor labourer moves to some another place after 6-8 months of employment there, moves to another place after a year or two from there, no account of the money he deposited there is maintained. The amount is also so low that he does not wish to bring back the same by spending two hundred
rupees on fare. That is why Rs. 27 thousand crores of poor people of my country, labourers of my country, money earned by them by the sweat of their brow was lying idle in the coffers of the Government. We found a solution to it. We provided a special identity card number to these labourers and told them wherever you are transferred now, even if you move to another place by quitting the job or if you move from one factory to another, from one state to another, you will always retain
this number and you will retain your money, no one will be able to misappropriate your single rupee. So, we have tried to return the Rs. 27 thousand crores to the poor.
It has become a fashion in our country- make law for everything and keep our courts busy. One law may contradict the other but the law should be on the same subject. Confusion was being created here always. This is not a good sign for good governance and therefor, law should be explicit, law should be correct, law should not be out of sync with time, only then society progresses. 
Where will a poor labourer look for his thing of interest in the pile-up of different types of 44 legislations meant for our labourers? We have brought about a change therein. By incorporating these 44 legislations into four codes of conduct, the poorest of the poor and even an illiterate labourer can know about his or her interest, we have emphasized this scheme. 
Brothers and Sisters, corruption is a much discussed topic in our country. We must have seen an ailing person, habitually, giving tips to others on how to be healthy. He does not care for himself, but it is the nature of every human being to advise others that you do it and you will become healthy and you do that and you will become healthy. Corruption is also like this. The person involved in it, also advise, the person who is suffering due to it, also advise and thus they advise each
other, and this goes on and on. 
Brothers and Sisters, I have never made this announcement, but today I wish to state, I want to assure my fellow countrymen, I want to tell the "Team India" comprising 1.25 billion people that this country can become corruption-free. On the basis of experience I am saying this. This job has to be started from the top. Corruption is stuck with our country like a termite and the termite keeps on spreading, initially it is not visible, but when it spreads in our bedroom and reaches the
cupboard where clothes are hung, we find that and when we want to get rid of it, insecticides have to be injected per square meter of land. After so many of years of efforts, we get rid of termite. Countless efforts of several types have to be made to wipe out the corruption in such a vast country, and that can be done. If I had said that I would cut subsidy worth Rs. 15 thousand cores on LPG gas, then I can say that hundreds of articles would have been written to glorify
my Government. They can say that this man has the power and strength to discontinue the subsidy worth Rs. 15 thousand cores on LPG gas. It is this man who can take tough decision and if it is not done so, then nothing happens my dear friends and nothing is visible. Sometimes people are fond of sinking into despair. Until they talk of despair amongst people they can not sleep at night. 
They have this habit. There are some ailing people, who do not like to disclose about their illness and they also do not like to someone inquiring about their ailment. While there are some others who wait for a particular person to enquire about their health and if he does not visit, they talk about this for hours together. I can see that there are some people who always search for negativism, propagate negativism and they enjoy it as much as they can. Such people neither have any
schemes nor activities, yet "Team India' consisting of 1.25 billion Indians is ready to invest time for them, but how does that happen? We have put in place a scheme of Direct Benefit Transfer of LPG subsidy. Taking advantage of Jan Dhan Accounts and Adhaar Card we have transferred the subsidy directly into the accounts. As a result of this the brokers, the middlemen and the blackmarketeers have disappeared. Only the real beneficiary got the benefit. Our Government have
neither slashed a penny from anyone's benefit nor we have made announcements to earn praise. We have improved the system and today I wish to inform the 'Team India' of 1.25 billion Indians that as a result of this an amount of Rs.15 crore, which was being siphoned off annually in the name of gas cylinders has been stopped. My countrymen, the corruption has stopped. 
My brothers and sisters, you can see how work is done? We have done it. Rupees 15,000 crore is not a small amount for a country like India. We have launched an open website, displayed a board of delivery there, even then if someone has a complaint, he would get a cylinder even at midnight but we cannot permit those who loot the country and poors as well. Tell me whether this is not a fight against corruption? 
My brothers and sisters, I had made a request to my countrymen that if you are economically sound, then why do you avail subsidy on L.P.G? Why do you need this paltry amount of rupees five to seven hundred which you usually spend on petty snacks. I had just started giving message about this, I didn't launch any campaign as yet, because I have faith in "Team India'. As the message spreads the result would come, but to-day I can tell with pride that ever-since I had launched movement
of "give it up" subsidy of LPG gas cylinder, till date 20 lakh consumers have already given it up.
This is not a small figure. Even if we are in the queue before a temple for the blessings (Prasaad), we sometimes wish that we should get some of the prasad for our younger brother also. This is in our nature. These 20 lakh people are not from rich or wealthy families. They are all from the common middle class. Some teacher may have been a pensioner, but when he learnt that this LPG cylinder may go to some poor person, he gave up his subsidy. My dear brothers and sisters, when these 20
lakh LPG cylinders will reach the poor families whose kitchens are smoke choked, just think of the happiness of the mothers working in those kitchens! Just think of the relief and happiness of the little children who had been crying due to the smoke! Whenever our efforts are in the right direction, we get great results. 
My brothers and sisters, if I talk about coal, some of the political pundits or experts will judge me on a political angle. This is not a place for politicking, so I would like to urge upon all the political pundits that in this case, the kind of coal issue that I am going to raise, may please not be judged through the political angle. This is the requirement of our nation’s resolve. CAG said that when coal blocks were allocated through lottery, the nation lost Rs.1 lakh and 74 thousand
crores. We also used this statistics in the election-speeches. Nevertheless, we sometimes thought that this much of loss may not have been there. But we went on saying like that. Later we decided that whether it be coal, or spectrum or any other mineral, all will be auctioned henceforth. Lo and behold ! the great strength of the Team India of 125 crore Indians and their resolve ! within a certain time limit the coal was auctioned and now almost Rs. 3 lakh crore would be
accruing to the national exchequer. 
Brothers and sisters, just ask yourselves whether corruption was rooted out or not? Whether the middlemen were ousted or not? Whether the door was shut on the face of the wealth-stealers of India or not? I did not make any speech in this regard. I just did it. The same thing happened in the case of spectrum. Right now FM radio auction is going on. A lot of pressure was put on me. People said 'Modi ji, FM is operated by the common men, there in no great profit in this business. Why
are you putting even FM on auction? A lot of pressure was put on me. All attempts were made to dissuade me from this. But I said that the team India consisting of 125 crore of Indians wanted transparency. 
Right now the auction is on for FM Radio in some 80-85 cities. The day before when I enquired, the auction amount had crossed Rs. one thousand crores. This money is going to be used for the poor people. 
Brothers and sisters, what a run the country had at the hands of its leadership, how it was looted, what impact was put on the policies! What kind of an activity it was that continued in the country? Imported coal from the foreign countries was not given to the power plants near the coasts. It was transported to the factories of nearby areas of coal mines and the coal from those mines instead was taken to the factories in the coastal region. Now, even a small child in this country can
understand as to how the goods can be utilized for the place where they are situated instead of going for their transport from that place to the other. 
Brothers and sisters, we changed that decision. Nearby factories should be the first beneficiaries. And let me say that this small decision closed down the shops of the middlemen and the exchequer has got Rs. 1100 crores. My dear citizens, it will happen every year now. 
Corruption in a way has become part of the system. Until it is stamped out from the system, dear brothers and sisters, I’ll keep suffering every atrocity, facing every obstacle but with your blessings I shall fulfill the dream of a corruption free India. I say this to you from the ramparts of the Red Fort with the tricolour as my witness and the understanding of the dreams of the 125 crore people. It’s been 15 months since you put our Government in Centre and gave me the mandate.
This Government does not have any allegation of corruption against it for even a single penny. But I had said alongside that it was like the pests, the termite. Corruption free Government in Delhi only is not going to solve the whole problem. There are problems at the small places right now and the poor are getting troubled. We need to bring in a national level awareness for this. We need to comprehend this menace of corruption properly and get everyone on board to eradicate it.
Then only can we get rid of the menace.
Brothers and sisters, let me say further that we have taken some very important steps one after the other to check black money, and that too in a very short span of time. 
The day we formed the Government, we constituted an SIT under the supervision of the Supreme Court. We did what was pending for three years. The SIT is doing its job. I attended the G-20 summit. These are the countries whose support we need for bringing black money back. On India’s insistence a resolution was passed against black money. All G-20 countries resolved to cooperate with each other and send back the black money to the country where it belonged. We adopted FATCA along with the
United States. We have signed agreements with many countries for receiving real time information regarding Indian’s black money. We have taken several measures to check black money. 
Brothers and sisters, we have passed a strict law for this. After this enactment every week people call us and complain that we have passed a very stringent law. They call it a draconian law and a black law and say that officers would harass them. Dear fellow citizens, we need injections if the disease is serious. Doctors also warn us about the side effects of such injections. Similarly, this disease is so serious that if we want a treatment, we will have to bear the side effects also.
I know that people are upset with the law which we have passed. They find it troublesome. We have received many messages for diluting the provisions and relaxing it. Today I would like to tell Team India of 125 crore countrymen that even while bearing the side effects, we are moving forward against black money. This much has been done. It’s a fact that the process of bringing back the black money is long but now no one can dare to send the black money out of the country. This much has been
achieved, whether someone believes it or not. Not only this, we have given some grace period for declaring undisclosed income and today I can say that people have come forward and declared their undisclosed income amounting to Rs. 6500 crores. This amount will accrue to our exchequer. It will benefit the poor of India. Friends, I assure you all that we will move forward with all the resolve to fulfill the commitments we have made. 
Brothers and sisters, CBI had registered only eight hundred cases in the entire one year before formation of our government. We are still new in power but we have already registered eighteen hundred cases since we took charge; we have taken action against government employees. You can easily imagine and compare the figures. In the entire one year before we came to power, only eight hundred cases were registered and in the ten months of our government the corresponding number
is eighteen hundred. It shows our ability to fight corruption. 
In 2005, a law namely ‘PMLA’ was framed in our country. In ten years, an amount of ten thousand crore rupees has been recovered under that law. But you would be surprised to know that out of the total recovered amount of ten thousand crore rupees, four thousand five hundred crore rupees have been recovered in the last ten months. This is another example of our commitment to fight corruption about which we are not talking in press conferences on TV; rather we have taken steps on
the ground and reaped success. We have endeavored to change systems. We have taken steps to ensure that the ‘MGNREGA’ wages go directly to the Jan Dhan account; that the scholarship for students goes directly into their bank accounts; and that there is least brokerage. And I believe that because of these steps the country can fulfill those objectives. 
My farmer brothers and sisters, last year we had deficient rainfall. It was less than required. It affected the economy as well as our farmers. We were still able to curb the price rise. One will have to admit the fact that before us, the inflation was in double digits. Since we came to power, although there has been less rain and the farmers were distressed; we have been successful in bringing down the inflation from double digits to 3-4 percent. We will continue to strive
to bring it further down because our dream is to provide wholesome meals to the poorest of the poor. However, we need drastic changes in the agriculture sector. The cultivable land is shrinking; it is getting divided between families and pieces of land are getting smaller. The fertility and productivity of our agricultural land must increase. The farmers need water and electricity and we are working towards their availability. We have decided to pump in fifty thousand crore rupees in
‘Pradhaan Mantri Krishi Sinchaai Yojna’. How will the water reach the farms? Water will have to be saved. We have to launch a movement in our agricultural sector with the mantra of “Save Water, Save Energy, and Save Fertilizers”. Hence, “Per drop more crop” is our watchword; each drop of water can contribute towards producing more crop and hence successful farming. We have moved in the direction of spending funds to take this cause further. 
In the recent past, when our crops got damaged due to hailstorm, we increased the compensation enormously. Such an increase has never been witnessed in the past 60 years. Not only this, earlier if there were any losses, there was the norm according to which one would be entitled for compensation only if the losses suffered were at least 50 per cent. We have brought it down to 30 per cent. Never in the past 60 years was such a great initiative of helping the farmers taken. Farmers
need urea. I would like to tell once again as to how to fight corruption. “Neem-Coating” is not the brain child of Modi, rather it is an idea propounded by Scientists and this idea has not only been brought before my government, it has come before previous governments as well. In our country, urea worth millions and billions of rupees is allocated in the names of farmers, but 15, 20 or 25 per cent of this urea is diverted to the chemical factories as raw material. Allocated in the names of
farmers, this urea is pilfered through the middlemen. This pilferage of urea cannot be stopped unless we go for cent per cent “Neem-Coating” of urea. Therefore, irrespective of the burden caused to the exchequer, we have accomplished the task of doing hundred per cent “Neem-Coating” of urea. As a result of this, now urea cannot be used for any purpose other than farming. Now, no chemical factory can indulge in any kind of pilferage of urea. The farmers will have as much urea as
they need. Since the urea is “Neem Coated”, even if they use 10 per cent less of urea, their land will be benefitted with the nutritional value it requires. The farmers of my country will be having a new advantage of urea - I would suggest to all the farmers that even if by chance someone shows you urea without “Neem-Coating”, you take it to be unauthorized by the Government. If someone gives you a yellow powder, don’t even touch it. 
Brothers and sisters, India cannot develop till the eastern part of the country develops. India cannot be said to be developing only on the basis of the development of the western parts of the country. India will move ahead only when our eastern Uttar Pradesh becomes prosperous, our Bihar becomes strong, our West Bengal, Assam, Odisha, North Eastern regions tread the path of development. These territories of India should become powerful. And so whether is a matter of
infrastructure or of rail connectivity or of digital connectivity - in all these aspects, we have focussed on eastern India. This focus has resulted in the proposed laying of a gas pipe line in this region. Who could have thought that the states where there was no potable tap water even in kitchen, there we are working to supply the gas through pipe lines. Four urea fertilizer plants were shut down in eastern India. Youth of these states were unemployed and farmers were in distress. We have
made new urea policy and we have also formulated new gas supply policy. This has resulted in revival of fertilizer plants of eastern centers of Gorakhpur, Barauni, Talcher and Sindari. Thus we are working to provide employment to the youth and fertilizers to the farmers. 
Brothers and sisters, there is a Government Department for Army soldiers and for their welfare. In our country farmers are as important as soldiers. What have we done in sixty years! We have emphasized on the economic aspect of agriculture. With the intention to have flourishing agriculture and for agricultural advancement, the concerned ministry of this government has been named as 'Ministry of Agriculture'. 
Brothers and sisters, Agricultural growth is as important as the welfare of farmers. Only talking about agricultural development is incomplete for rural life style and for agriculture based livelihood. That will become complete, when the welfare of the farmer is also linked. Brothers and Sisters, the Ministry of the Government of India which was earlier known as "Ministry of Agriculture", from now will be known as the "Ministry of farmer Welfare" and in the days to come
schemes for the welfare of farmers will also be formulated alike the schemes for agriculture are prepared and the Government would make efforts to provide help to the farmers by means of setting permanent system for the problems that my farmers has to face in his personal life, the hurdles that he has to go through. 
Brothers and sisters, in the coming days I wish to concentrate on an issue. There has been so many years of independence but even today there are about eighteen thousand, five hundred such villages in our country, where electric wires and polls are yet to reach. Eighteen thousand five hundred villages are deprived of the sun of independence, deprived of the light of independence, they are deprived of the rays of development of independence. If we will keep on following the old
methods, perhaps it will take ten more years to electrify these eighteen thousand, five hundred villages with wires and polls. The country is not ready to wait for ten years. 
I took the meeting of government officials and enquired from them about the timeline. Someone promised to complete the task till 2019, someone assured to complete it till 2022. Some were hesitant due to dense forests or snowy hills, and some had apprehension due to inaccessibility of certain areas. But, it is now the solemn pledge of the "Team India" of 1.25 billion countrymen that the target of providing electric polls, electric wires and electricity to these 18,500
villages would be achieved within next 1000 days. I urge upon the states to come forward and accept this challenge. This is not pending in every state, only a few states will have to strive a little further. I would not like to count the name of such states, as it would be viewed politically and may attract political comments. Hence, it's better to avoid it. I, therefore, announce the pledge of the 'Team India' of our 1.25 billion countrymen, from the Red Fort, that electricity would be
made available to 18,500 villages within the next 1000 days, with the help of states and local bodies. 
I have taken up another issue of concern, which is 'Welfare of Farmers'. Similar issue of grave concern is the under-development of such mining areas, from where we get mineral resources, such as coal, bauxite and other minerals. Now, look at the life of people there. They sweat to make our country rich but that region is not developed and, therefore, we have formulated a special scheme for the development of the labourers and farmers of the region from where minerals are extracted
and around rupees six thousand crores will be spent every year on the regions which fall in the areas of my tribals brothers, located in my tribal areas. Where coal is found? Coal is found in tribal areas. We have undertaken work to see development takes place there. 
Brother and sisters, our youth power is of import for taking the country forward in twenty first century and today, I want to declare that if we have to move ahead in comparison to the whole world, we have to encourage our youths, we have to provide them opportunities. How our youths become new entrepreneurs, how our youths become new producers, how a complete network of start-up by these new entrepreneurs is set up in the whole country? There should not be any district, any block in
Hindustan where there are not start-up initiated in the coming days. Whether India cannot dream that India becomes number one in the world of start-up. Today we are not at that position. Brothers and Sisters, I have to provide strength to start-up and, therefore, I resolve that in the coming days "Start-up India" and "Stand-up India" will be there or the future of the country. And for a bright future of the country "Stand-up India" shall be launched when I want to move
forward this job pertaining to "Start-up India", "Stand-up India", my brothers and sisters, in our country our bank officials have done a herculean task, and when you do a good job, my expectations rise a lot. 
My banker friends, my expectations are rising, so please do not get offended, but I trust you that your subordinate staff is contributing a lot for the economic advancement of this nation and in future they will continue to put in further more efforts. I want to assign you a task today. There are 1.25 lakhs banking units i.e. 1.25 lakhs branches of banks in the country. Today, I would like to assign a task to these 1.25 lakhs branches. This year marks the 125th anniversary of Dr. Baba
Saheb Ambedkarji. There are 1 crore 25 lakhs branches of banks. This is my programme referred to as "Start-up India", under this programme more schemes will be formulated, but every branch must resolve and in the days to come resolve once again to disburse loans for start-ups to the tribals in the locality where there is any tribal habitation, and where there is no tribal habitation, the branch can provide loans to a dalit or a tribal, give financial support to them and thus
enable 1.25 lakhs Dalit entrepreneurs to come up. Let there be tribal entrepreneurs in the tribal settlements of this country. We can do this, we can give a new dimension to start-up and secondly whether these one lakh twenty five thousand branches can formulate a special scheme for women entrepreneurs? These one lakh twenty five thousand branches should promote start-up of women entrepreneurs and help them financially. You will find that with in no time, India would see a network of
start up, new entrepreneurs would emerge and they would in-turn provide employment ranging form one to two to four persons which will transform India's economic life. 
Brothers and sisters, when investment comes to the country, we expect more manufacturing work and more exports and the finance department of the Government offer new schemes to such investors. It has its own significance and this should continue. But today I have a new idea that the investment coming to our country in the manufacturing sector should be offered assistance based on new parameters and one of them shall be that an investor who comes with an enterprise which provides
employment to maximum persons would be eligible for a different kind of economic package. 
The Government would now formulate new schemes for new units linking it with employment and assistance of Government. We want to stress upon the growth of employment opportunities in the country. We have reached far beyond in the direction of fulfilling the dreams of skill India and digital India. Brothers and sisters, one area of corruption is job. The poorest of the poor man aspires for his son's job and we have seen that whenever a youth receives a call for an interview for a job,
may be that is for interview in railway, for a teacher, for a peon, for a driver, he began to think about who he should approach for recommendation? Even his widow mother begin to brood over the issue. why? That is because in our country justice and injustice are mostly decided on the basis of interview rather than the basis of merit and it is said that the person has failed in the interview. I have not seen any such psychologist till now, who are capable of assessing a person on
the basis of interviewing him just for two minutes. 
Brothers and sisters, I have been thinking over it for many days that whether it is necessary to appear for an interview for a son of a poor mother, for a less educated person who is in need of petty jobs? Whether he can't get any job without an interview? Whether on the basis of his mark-sheet online-- it should be decided on the basis of online mark sheet that if we require five hundred people, than who should be those initial five hundred people, then who should be initial
two thousand people. Of course, where the testing of physical fitness is required, the norms and system could vary there. Personality and experience of a candidate matters only for jobs of senior ranks, but it is painful to see that candidates even from the states of Nagaland and Mizoram rush to Mumbai to appear in exams for junior-level posts in Railways. I have to combat this problem. I impress upon the state governments and my colleagues of the Government to discontinue the stage
of interview for junior-level posts as soon as possible. Such jobs should be given just on the basis of merit. This would help in curbing corruption, which hurts the poor people, and it would ease out their problem. It is my appeal to endeavour towards this goal. 
My countrymen enjoy sound sleep. But, if our 1.25 billion countrymen are able to enjoy their undisturbed sleep, it is only due to ever-readiness of our jawans to sacrifice themselves, who are posted at the borders. No country can under-evaluate the importance of its armed forces. For the 'Team India' of 1.25 billion countrymen, each and every soldier or jawan is the strength of the nation, wealth of the nation and force of the nation. Many successive governments have come and gone over
the years. The issue of "One Rank One Pension" has come before every government, each one has considered its proposal, and each and every government has made promises on it, but the problem is still pending to be resolved. 
After my assuming office as Prime Minister I have not been able to do this by now. Today, I am again assuring all the service personnel and this is not being said by one man, I am saying this on behalf of One hundred and twenty five crores people of "Team India". I am saying this under the Tricolour from the ramparts of the Red Fort. I say to service personnel, we have accepted "One Rank One Pension" in principal but talks are going on with its organizations. Talks have
reached at the final stage and we want that all get justice keeping in view the development of whole country. We have to find the solution of this problem in the light of above context which is lingering on from 20-25 years. I believe that the trust in which talks are being held, some positive result will come out of it. And, therefore, I again assure that this Government has accepted "One Rank One Pension" in principal. How it is implemented in view of its nitty-gritty situation, we
are taking the talks forward by engaging with its stakeholders. 
Brothers and sisters, India is completing 75 years of its independence in 2022. We have not to sit idle after celebrating 75 years of India's independence on 15th August, 2022. Today itself, on this 15th August, let we have a resolution for the 15th August, 2022 that 6 lakhs villages of India, each village must decide and resolve that by 2022, we will be able to overcome problem in every village. My 1.25 billion countrymen and we, in our lives, take a resolution for the 2022, the 75
years of Independence of India. Every citizen take a resolution that I will perform this task for the well being of the country and betterment of the society. Once my 1.25 crores fellow countrymen will move forward with a resolution, then by the dawn of 15th August 2022, when the souls of soldiers who laid down their lives for the freedom will see that the country might have fulfilled 1.25 crores resolutions, 6 lakhs villages might have realized their dreams. Cities, Metropolitan
cities, every department of the government, every unit of the government should take a resolution and get to work. And there should not be any literature, there should not be any programme wherein 15th August 2022 is not re-iterated, where resolution for the 75th years of Independence is not re-iterated. A momentum need to be created. Brothers and Sisters the movement for freedom lasted several decades. Nevertheless the freedom was in the air only, then someone raised the issue of
freedom in the year 1910, again in the year 1920 and again and again in the year 1930 and so on. The issue was re-iterated for decades, only then we attained freedom. In order to build a self confident, magnificent and prosperous India we have to make our country competent, prosperous and healthy. We have to fulfill the dream of a well cultured India, build self confident India and excellent India. No poor person in this country should remain without shelter by 2022. We have to succeed
in providing round the clock electricity. Our farmer should be capable, our worker should be satisfied, our women should be empowered, our youth should be self dependent, our elderly should be hail and hearty and our poor should be prosperous. No one should remain backward in our society and everyone should enjoy equal rights and entire Indian society should reel in harmony. With this dream once again I convey my heartiest congratulation to 1.25 billion countrymen on this pious festival
of freedom with preparedness to move forward in a specific role for 75th anniversary of independence. Repeat me with full strength:- 
Bharat Mata Ki Jai,Bharat Mata Ki Jai,Bharat Mata Ki Jai.
 
 Vande Mataram, Vande Mataram, Vande Mataram.
  
  Jai Hind, Jai Hind, Jai Hind!
#DELIMITER#
5 8 2015, India
Media briefing with Mozambique president
Excellency President Filipe Nyusi, 
Members of the Media, 
I am delighted to welcome President Nyusi and his delegation to India. 
President Nyusi assumed office earlier this year. We are happy that India is his first destination in Asia.
The visit is special because this is the 40th anniversary year of independence of Mozambique and the 40th anniversary year of the establishment of our diplomatic relations. 
Africa and the Indian Ocean are among the highest priorities for our foreign policy. Mozambique is crucial for both. 
Mozambique and India have centuries-old trade ties. 20,000 people of Indian origin in Mozambique are an important link between us. Our colonial experiences and development aspirations have shaped a shared vision and a strong partnership. 
Mozambique can be a large and a proximate source of natural gas, coal and other minerals that are so important to drive our growth. It also offers huge opportunities in agriculture sector. 
I am pleased that Indian investments in these sectors have grown significantly in recent years. Mozambique hosts nearly 25% of Indian investments in Africa. Our trade has multiplied five times in the last five years. 
We are delighted to be a development partner for Mozambique in several areas, including agriculture, healthcare, energy, infrastructure and human resource development. 
So, as we seek to deepen our relations with Mozambique and enhance our engagement in the Indian Ocean Region and Africa, we are pleased that President Nyusi is visiting us now. 
In my discussions today, I have conveyed the importance that we attach to Mozambique as our regional partner. I have also stressed our commitment to our development partnership, in accordance with Mozambique’s priorities. 
We spoke of our economic synergies and cooperation. I expressed hope that Mozambique would continue to provide an encouraging environment for investments from India, including in the areas of hydrocarbons, minerals and infrastructure. We have agreed to explore ways to speed up the implementation of power supply project in Maputo, being funded by Indian line of credit. 
I have assured him of India’s full assistance and collaboration in agriculture and food security. In turn, India could also benefit from the development of Mozambique’s agriculture sector.
We have today finalised an MoU on Cooperation in the field of Renewable Energy. This is an important area in our respective efforts towards sustainable development. It assumes special importance this year as the international community moves to finalise a Climate Change agreement in Paris later this year. India has already partnered Mozambique in setting up a solar panel assembly plant. 
India and Mozambique have large coastlines and are linked by Indian Ocean. I have discussed ways in which we can intensify cooperation in maritime security and ocean economy.
In recent years, our cooperation has included ship visits and hydrography surveys for Mozambique. 
Today, we have discussed other areas of cooperation in defence, building on his last visit to India as Defence Minister in 2011. We agreed that the next meeting of our Joint Working Group on Defence Cooperation will be scheduled soon. 
We also discussed a range of regional and global issues of mutual interest. We greatly appreciate Mozambique’s support for India’s candidature for Permanent membership of an expanded UN Security Council. 
In this 70th year of the United Nations, I sought his support to press for urgently needed reforms of the United Nations, especially the Security Council. 
We also welcome the finalisation of the Sustainable Development Goals with focus on elimination of poverty by 2030, and look forward to the adoption of the post-2015 Development Agenda in September.
We underlined the need for an effective climate change accord in Paris later this year, which also provides the means and technology to developing countries to transition to clean energy sources. 
I briefed President Nyusi about the Third India-Africa Forum Summit to be held in October in New Delhi. There are remarkable similarities in the development goals and priorities of India and Africa. 
For the first time, we have invited leaders of 54 African countries to participate in the India-Africa Forum Summit. We look forward to President Nyusi’s participation in the Summit. 
Finally, let me extend our sincere appreciation for your government’s strong support that made the International Day of Yoga a big success in Mozambique. 
Excellency, your visit has renewed the focus on this very important relationship, not just for our two countries, but also as a bridge across the Indian Ocean between Africa and India. I am confident that your experience and wisdom will be a source of strength in taking our relationship to a new level. 
Thank you very much, President.
#DELIMITER#
3 8 2015, India
Historic agreement between Government and NSCN
Shri Rajnath Singhji, Home Minister 
Shri Muivah and all senior leaders of the National Socialist Council of Nagaland. 
My warm greetings to all those present here today on this historic occasion! 
I wish that Shri Isak Swu, who played a leading role in reaching this agreement, was present today. He could not be here because of poor health. I wish him speedy recovery. Just as his contribution to this agreement has been huge, his guidance will remain crucial in the times ahead. 
The Naga political issue had lingered for six decades, taking a huge toll on generations of our people. 
I sincerely thank Shri Isak Swu, Shri Muivah and other Naga leaders for their wisdom and courage, for their efforts and cooperation, which has resulted in this historic agreement. 
I have the deepest admiration for the great Naga people for their extraordinary support to the peace efforts. I compliment the National Socialist Council of Nagaland for maintaining the ceasefire agreement for nearly two decades, with a sense of honour that defines the great Naga people. 
My relationship with the North East has been deep. I have travelled to Nagaland on many occasions. I have been deeply impressed by the rich and diverse culture and the unique way of life of the Naga people. It makes not only our nation, but also the world a more beautiful place. 
The Naga courage and commitment are legendary. Equally, they represent the highest levels of humanism. Their system of village administration and grass-root democracy should be an inspiration for the rest of the country. 
The respect for the infirm and elders, the status of women in society, sensitivity to Mother Nature, and the emphasis on social equality is a natural way of Naga life. These are values that should constitute the foundation of the society that we all seek. 
Unfortunately, the Naga problem has taken so long to resolve because we did not understand each other. It is a legacy of the British Rule. The colonial rulers had, by design, kept the Nagas isolated and insulated. They propagated terrible myths about Nagas in the rest of the country. They deliberately suppressed the reality that the Nagas were an extremely evolved society. They also spread negative ideas about the rest of India amongst Naga people. This was part of the well known policy
of divide and rule of the colonial rulers. 
It is one of the tragedies of Independent India that we have lived with this legacy. There were not many like Mahatma Gandhi, who loved the Naga people and was sensitive to their sentiments. We have continued to look at each other through the prism of false perceptions and old prejudices. 
The result was that connectivity between Nagaland and the rest of India remained weak across this divide. Economic development and progress in Nagaland remained modest; and, durable peace was elusive. 
Since becoming Prime Minister last year, peace, security and economic transformation of North East has been amongst my highest priorities. It is also at the heart of my foreign policy, especially the ‘Act East’ Policy. 
I have been deeply concerned about resolving the Naga issue. Soon after entering office, I appointed an interlocutor for talks with the Naga leaders, who not only understood the Naga people as also their aspirations and expectations, but has great affection and respect for them. 
Given the importance of this initiative, I asked my office to supervise these talks; and I personally kept in touch with the progress. I want to especially thank my senior colleague, Home Minister Shri Rajnath Singhji, whose support and advice was invaluable in bringing us here today. 
Today’s agreement is a shining example of what we can achieve when we deal with each other in a spirit of equality and respect, trust and confidence; when we seek to understand concerns and try to address aspirations; when we leave the path of dispute and take the high road of dialogue. It is a lesson and an inspiration in our troubled world. 
Today, we mark not merely the end of a problem, but the beginning of a new future. We will not only try to heal wounds and resolve problems, but also be your partner as you restore your pride and prestige. 
Today, to the leaders and the people of Nagaland, I say this: You will not only build a bright future for Nagaland, but your talents, traditions and efforts will also contribute to making the nation stronger, more secure, more inclusive and more prosperous. You are also the guardians of our eastern frontiers and our gateway to the world beyond. 
Equally, the rest of the nation will join you in shaping a future of dignity, opportunity and prosperity for the Naga people. 
Today, as you begin a new glorious chapter with a sense of pride, self-confidence and self-respect, I join the nation in saluting you and conveying our good wishes to the Naga people. 
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
26 7 2015, India
mann ki baat
My Dear Countrymen, Namaskar!
This year the rains have started on a good note. This will definitely prove beneficial to our farmer brothers and sisters in sowing of kharif crops. I am very pleased to share an immensely good news with you all. We have always faced scarcity of pulses and oilseeds in our country. Poor people require pulses and some amount of oil to prepare vegetables for their food. The good news for me is that there has been an increase of approximately 50% in the production of pulses and an
increase of around 33% in the production of oilseeds. I would especially like to congratulate and compliment all my farmer brothers and sisters for this achievement.
My dear countrymen, 26th July is marked as Kargil Vijay Diwas in the history of our country. The intensity with which the farmers are connected with their land, our soldiers too are connected with the land in the same degree. During the Kargil war, each one of our soldier proved mightier than hundreds of soldiers of our enemies. I would like to salute all our brave soldiers who thwarted the attempts by our enemies without caring for their lives. Kargil war was not limited to just
our borders, but each of our cities, villages contributed in this war. This war was fought by those mothers and sisters whose sons and brothers were fighting against the enemies at the border. This war was also fought by the daughters of our country, who were newly married and their henna were still fresh on their hands. Also, by the proud fathers, who saw themselves as soldiers, seeing their sons fighting for the country, and also by that infant who had not even learnt to walk
catching his father’s fingers. It is because of these unmatchable sacrifices that our country is proudly standing on its feet in front of the entire world. Hence, I would like to salute all these valiant warriors on this occasion of Kargil Vijay Diwas.
There is another reason why I consider 26th July quite important because MyGov.in was launched a few months after our government was formed. Our pledge was to promote citizen participation in democracy and connect every citizen in the development work. And today I am pleased to share this after one year that nearly two crore people have visited MyGov website. We have received comments from five and a half lac people and I am extremely glad to mention that more than fifty
thousand people took out time from their precious schedule to apply their mind and provide their suggestions on PMO applications as they considered this work important. And we have received quite significant suggestions. One of the suggestions sent from Mr. Akhilesh Vajpayee from Kanpur is to provide separate quota to the disabled for booking tickets on IRCTC website. It is quite unfair that the disabled citizens have to go through the same tiring procedure and buy tickets at
the railway station. Though this is a very minor issue but the government never took note of it or thought about the same previously. But on the suggestion of our brother Akhilesh Vajpayee, our government looked into this suggestion seriously and we have implemented this facility in our system for our disabled brothers and sisters. We are receiving quite positive suggestions on MyGov, it is helping in getting assistance in creating logos, tag-lines and formulating policies by
yourselves. We are experiencing fresh air in the administrative system. We are experiencing a new sense of consciousness. I am even receiving suggestion on MyGov that what should be my speech on 15th of August.
We have received quite a few suggestions from Suchitra Raghavachari from Chennai in this regard. She has suggested me to speak on the topics like Save our Daughters, Educate a Girl Child, Clean Ganges, Swachh Bharat. With this I got an idea and I am requesting you all to send suggestions about what should be the topics for my 15th August speech. You can send in your suggestions through MyGov, letters to Radio or write letters to the PM’s office. Look, I believe that this will be a great
initiative to include people’s suggestion in framing my speech for 15th August. I believe that you will send your good suggestions.
I would like to talk about an issue which is a matter of great concern. I neither want to sermonize nor I am trying to find an escape route towards my responsibilities pertaining to state government, central government or units of local self-government institutions.
Two days ago a visual of an accident in Delhi caught my attention, wherein the victim on scooter was fighting for his life for ten minutes post the accident. He did not receive any help from the passers-by. In general also I have noticed that I have been receiving suggestions to speak on road safety and make the people aware of this. Be it Hoshakote Akshay from Bengaluru, Ameya Joshi from Pune or Prasanna Kakunje from Mudbidri, Karnataka – all these all people have written
to me… there are many other names which I am not being able to mention and have raised their concerns. I agree that whatever you have put forth is valid.
My heart shivers when I look at the statistics of accidents. We are witnessing an accident every minute in our country. Due to these road accidents we are witnessing one death every four minutes in our country. It is a matter of huge concern that out of these deaths, nearly one third of the victims comprise the youth ranging from 15 to 25 years of age group, and such death shakes the very foundation of an entire family. The government system will continue to work towards this but I
would like to request all the parents to make their children aware of all the Safety Rules pertaining to driving a two-wheeler or a four-wheeler – the families should encourage discussion of road safety at home and create an atmosphere about the same to promote road safety. We have seen few lines written at the back of auto-rickshaws, “Papa, come home early” and after reading it we are so touched by it. And therefore I say that the government has taken a lot of new initiatives
in this regard, be it the initiative of education on Road Safety, initiative related to road engineering or of enforcement of road safety laws and the discussion on Emergency Care to be provided post accidents. We are going to implement Road Transport and Safety Bill to adopt these safety measures in our country. In the coming days, we are also planning to take many important measures for implementing National Road Safety Policy and Road Safety Action Plan.
We have undertaken another project called Cashless Treatment in Gurgaon, Jaipur and Vadodara to Mumbai, Ranchi, Rangaon and Mundiya national highway and it will be further extended. The Cashless Treatment refers to the policy for the first fifty hours post-accident – one need worry if one has money or not, who will pay the bills, leaving all this worry – one has to give primary importance to the road accident victim who is injured so that he is treated and provided the best hospital
facilities at the earliest. We have started a toll-free number 1033 for providing information about incidents across the country and ambulance service but all these are services are for post accidents. One must strive to avoid accidents first but it is also important for us to see from the perspective that each and every soul, each and every life is precious.
Sometimes I say that the government employees to be Karma Yogis or selfless workers. I recalled a few incidents in the last few days which I liked and hence would like to share with you. Sometimes people get tired of their continuous jobs. In the initial few years the attitude is “okay, I get my salary so I will work”. However, I came across an incident of a railway department a few days ago, wherein a railway TTE Vijay Biswal from Nagpur division who is gifted with painting prowess
could have has chosen to showcase his skills related to any field but he continues to work with the railways and paints various scenes related to railways only. Through this he gets an inner satisfaction for his job and also enjoys his hobby at the same time. Using his example, we can learn how to bring more life to our own jobs. Vijay Biswal has shown us how we can connect our jobs with our hobbies, interests or skills. Who knows, Vijay Biswal’s work may get recognised by his
paintings across the nation in the near future.
I have come to know about a very inspiring work started by the entire team of government officials in Harda district, Madhya Pradesh. These bunch of officials with their entire team have started such a work which has touched me immensely and I really liked it – and the work they have started is ‘Operation Malyuddh’, and upon hearing this you will feel that this subject will go in a certain direction. But the key focus of this operation is to give a new direction to Swachh Bharat
Abhiyaan. They are working on ‘Brother Number One’ operation in which the best brother has to gift one toilet to his sister. On the occasion of Raksha Bandhan, they are influencing all the brothers to gift toilet to their sisters, so that all the mothers and sisters of the district avoid going to toilet in the open. This operation has given a new meaning to Raksha Bandhan and I would like to congratulate the entire government team of Harda district for this initiative.
I came across a news a few days back and these small news really gives me immense pleasure and I would like to share the same with you. There exists a small village called Keshla in Rajnandgaon, Chhattisgarh. The inhabitants of this village from last few months tried and lead a campaign for building toilets in the village. Now, nobody from this village has to go to toilet in the open. After the completion of this campaign, the entire village celebrated this accomplishment just like a
mega festival. These finest examples coming up to me show how our society is bringing change in human values and human mind and how the citizens of this country are taking the nation forward.
Bhavesh Deka from Guwahati has written to me on the North-East related issues and problems. I must say that North-East people are quite active. I really appreciate that they write about a lot of issues. I would like to tell them with great pleasure that we have a separate ministry for North-Eastern region. During the government of Atal Bihari Vajpayee as our Prime Minister, a DONER Ministry called “Development of North-East Region” was formed. After our government was formed, the
DONER Department took an important decision of not staying in Delhi and working from centre for the North-East regions? Instead it was decided to send the government officials and their team on a seven days camp to North-East states like Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh, Tripura, Assam and Sikkim. These officials would visit the districts, villages and meet the local government officials and talk to people’s representatives and the citizens of those regions. They will listen to their
problems and direct the government in taking appropriate measures in solving those problems. This initiative will bring a fruitful result in the near future. The officials who will visit these states would realize the beauty of these states and will feel very determined to work for the development of these states and to fix the problems of these states. When they return with this pledge, they can easily understand the problems of these states even when they reach Delhi. This is a great
initiative to go far-off from Delhi to East, and this act is called “Act East Policy”.
My dear countrymen, we are extremely delighted and proud of the “Mars Mission” success. India’s PSLV C-28 has launched five UK satellites, which are the heaviest satellites launched by India till date. Such news remain in the flashlight for few moments and are gone. We often do not remember these achievements for a long time. I am often worried by this thought that we speak to the youth of our nation and ask about their dream job, only one out of 100 would express their
interest in becoming a scientist. Youth is losing their interest in science, which is a matter of great concern.
Science and Technology is a type of DNA for development. The youth of our country should dream about becoming a scientist and imbibe interests in the field of research and innovation. Their capabilities should be monitored and must be assisted in the right direction to achieve success in this field. Ministry of Human Resource Development, Govt. of India has initiated a National Discovery Campaign. It was inaugurated by India’s ex-President Dr. A.P.J Abdul Kalam. As
a part of this campaign, IIT, NIT, Central and State Universities being their mentor and guide are going to educate and motivate the aspiring students to choose the right path in their career. I always press upon the IAS officers of our government, who have reached such heights with their vast intellect and education that they should visit the nearby schools and colleges and share their knowledge for just two to four hours in a week. Your experience and intellect would certainly help
the new generation to some extent.
We have raised a very big issue regarding the supply of 24 hours electricity in the villages of our country. This work is difficult but it must be done. We have auspiciously inaugurated this scheme and the villages will get a supply of 24 hours electricity in the coming years. The students of the villages should not be affected with the shortage of electricity during their exams. There should be enough electricity for starting a small industry. Today, the villagers have to go to other
villagers for charging their mobile phones. The villages should be provided with all the facilities that are available in the cities. For this purpose, we have launched “Deendayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Programme”. I am aware that this country is quite vast and we have to reach the villages and far off corners of the country. We have to run for the development of the Poor. We will achieve this goal and it is already in progress. We will certainly achieve this. Today, through Mann ki Baat,
I felt like expressing these myriad of thoughts.
In a way, in our country the months of August and September are the months for celebration of festivals. There are lots of festivals in these months. My greetings to all of you for the same. Please do send your suggestions for 15th August. Your opinions will really help me.
Thank you very much to you all!
#DELIMITER#
22 7 2016, India
Unveils statue of late mahant adityanath
All the honourable spiritual masters and saints worth remembering in everyday morning and all the ardent devotees present here.
It’s my privilege that today I’ve got the opportunity to unveil the statue of inspirational personality most worshippable Mahant Avaidyanath ji Maharaj as well as to receive the blessings of all of you. This soil of Gorakhpur holds a uniqueness in the sense be it Lord Budhha, Mahavira or Kabir, all of them had an unbreakable bond with this in one or another way. The glorious tradition of Guru Gorakshanath ji (Gorakhnath ji) was started with the great vision of upliftment and advancement of not just the individuals, but also of the society as a whole.
Often, some ills or hurdles start gradually creeping into the traditions prevailing in the society over a long period of time. However, if the ideals and rules of the traditions are fully observed, then it becomes possible to keep the traditions free from the circumstantial pressures. Gujarat boasts plenty of places linked with the brilliant tradition initiated by Gorakhnath ji. While being in Gujarat, once I was sitting with Mahant Avaidyanath ji, as my association with him goes back to the time even when I was not active in the politics.
At that time, I came to know from him how in this time-honoured tradition, the entire system is conducted in an organised way, how its rules and policies are complied with, how the full information of the associated saints is retained, irrespective of the place of the world they stay at, how they are rendered financial support in time of rainy days. Since a long time, The Gorakhnath tradition has been successfully kept alive and the credit goes to the signal contribution of those great personas who have got the good fortune to serve on this seat of monastery.
Be it the freedom struggle of India or the significant task of social reconstruction post-independence, Mahant Avaidyanath ji played an active role in both time phases. He had added an another dimension to his life by his vision to ignite the social consciousness through pilgrimage centre remaining within the democratic purviews and then provide the common people benefits of transformed situation. This vision is being successfully kept up with and carried forward even today by his disciple Yogi Adityanath ji.
All the saint traditions, mathas (monastic establishments) and akharas (religious bodies) of India look sometimes fairly distinct and conflicting from the outside. Despite that, one thing is inherently common among all of them, that is never a poor or starving person returns hungry from their doors. No matter, a saint has something or not in the life, if he is sitting in a hut, his first question from the approaching devotee is “Would you like to take the Prasadam (food offered to the God)?” Such sorts of great traditions spring up out of the deep sensitivity towards the society and for that reason, such traditions inspire us devote our life and systems for the welfare and wellbeing of others. And, it is the success mantra of our age-old Indian traditions to last long proving their relevance in contemporary time periods.
All the traditions in our country have undergone timely changes. They have embraced the science with open arms, whenever they felt its need. Even, they have welcomed the shift in their social outlook. And, I’ve witnessed that how so many saints and seers, who were devoted to religious and spiritual works, have nowadays attached themselves towards furthering social missions like Swacch Bharat Abhiyan. I’ve even heard about the saints running campaign for building toilets and encouraging their devotees to do so. I’ve heard them making a heartfelt plea from the people to uphold the dignity of our mothers and sisters and take up the task to ensure that women live a respectful life.
I’ve even seen so many saints, who run eye surgery camps for rendering whatever support to the poorest of poor that they can. I’ve observed many saints who dedicate their lives for keeping animals healthy. Be it education, health or service, in each spheres of life, our saint tradition is getting involved today in one or other way.
And, it is the need of hour that lakhs of saints, thousands of traditions and hundreds of monasteries come forward to play a pivotal role in making India modern and prosperous, in cultivating good values among its citizens. Many are already doing it. And it is something, which augurs good signs for the future of India.
Each moment of Mahant Avaidyanath ji’s life was dedicated towards the pleasures and pains of the society. He was deeply concerned towards it and used to make all-out efforts for exploring the ways to tackle social problems. Encouraging and rewarding the people engaged in good deeds was his lifelong task. Today, I had the good fortune to unveil the statue and pay floral tribute to such a great persona. Let me end my speech by saluting you all and the land of this Gorakhnath temple, which is the land of severe penance, the land of ever-burning light (Akhand Jyoti), the land of continuous inspiration and the land, which rewards those accomplishing noble tasks.
Thank you very much.
#DELIMITER#
16 7 2016, India
Meeting of Inter state council, Delhi
Chief Ministers and Lt. Governors of States and Union Territories, and my Cabinet colleagues,
I welcome you all to this important meeting of the Inter State Council.
There are only a few occasions when the leadership of the Centre and the States, assembles together. This forum of cooperative federalism is the perfect setting to deliberate on the interests of the people, address their problems, and take collective and concrete decisions. It highlights the vision of the makers of our Constitution.
Let me begin by recalling what our beloved former Prime Minister Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee ji had said at this very forum sixteen years ago:
“In a democracy as big and diverse as ours, debate, deliberation and discussion help evolve policy that relates to the ground reality. More importantly, they enable the effective implementation of such policies.
The Inter-State Council is an inter-governmental forum that can be used for evolving policy as well as ensuring its implementation. I, therefore, urge the States to increasingly use this forum as an effective instrument to strengthen our democracy, our society and our polity.”
The Inter-State Council is certainly the most significant platform for strengthening Centre-State and Inter-State relations. There has been a long hiatus since the last meeting in 2006, but I am happy that through the efforts of Home Minister Rajnath Singh ji, the process has been restarted. Over the last one year, he has convened meetings of five zonal councils. The increased dialogue and connect has culminated in this gathering today.
The nation can progress only if the Union and State Governments walk shoulder to shoulder. It would be difficult for any Government to successfully implement a scheme on its own. Therefore, provision of adequate financial resources is as important as the responsibility for implementation.
With the acceptance of the 14th Finance Commission recommendations, the States’ share in central taxes has increased from 32 per cent to 42 per cent. This means that States now have greater financial resources to utilize in accordance with their requirements. I am happy to share that the total amount received by States from the Centre during 2015-16 is 21 per cent higher than the amount received in 2014-15. Similarly, Panchayats and Urban Local Bodies will receive 2.87 lakh crore rupees during the period of the 14th Finance Commission, which is substantially higher than last time.
The rights of States have been kept in mind, even in revenue received from the auction of natural resources, Auctions of coal blocks will yield 3.35 lakh crore rupees to States in the years to come. Auctions of other mines will yield an additional 18,000 crore rupees to states. Similarly, through amendments to CAMPA Act, we are attempting to free up about 40,000 crore rupees lying idle in banks, for disbursal to States.
The Union Government also wishes to share with States, the amount that is being saved as a result of transparency being introduced into the system. Kerosene is one example. Electricity connections are increasing in villages. The Union Government will provide 5 crore new cooking gas connections over the next three years. The supply of LPG will further increase. All these efforts have a direct bearing on the consumption of kerosene. Recently, the Chandigarh administration declared the city a kerosene-free zone. Now, the Union Government has launched a scheme, under which, if there is a reduction in the consumption of kerosene by a State, the Centre will disburse 75 per cent of the resultant savings in subsidy, as grant to that State. The Government of Karnataka, while moving swiftly on this initiative, has sent its proposal to the Petroleum Ministry. This has been accepted and the grant has been disbursed to the State Government. If all States decide to reduce kerosene consumption by 25 per cent, and actually do so, they can receive about 1600 crore rupees as grant this year.
Apart from Centre-State relations, the Inter State Council is an appropriate forum to discuss matters which are of concern to large segments of our population. How can we evolve consensus at the policy formulation stage? How can we address issues of mutual interest?
Therefore, in this meeting of the Inter State Council, besides the Punchhi Commission Report, three very important subjects have also been added to the Agenda.
One of these is Aadhaar. Parliament has passed the Aadhaar Act-2016. The passage of this Act enables us to use Aadhaar for Direct Cash Transfers for subsidy and other services.
As on date, 102 crore Aadhaar cards have been distributed in our country of 128 crore people. 79 per cent of our people now have Aadhaar cards. Among adults, 96 per cent people have Aadhaar cards. With your support, we shall connect every citizen of the country with an Aadhaar card by the year-end.
Today the simple Aadhaar card has become a symbol of empowerment. Benefits now flow only to people genuinely entitled to receive them, with money getting directly credited to their bank accounts. This has not only brought in transparency, but also resulted in savings of thousands of crores of rupees, which are being utilized for development.
Friends, Babasaheb Ambedkar had written – “The path of social reform like the path to heaven at any rate in India, is strewn with many difficulties. Social reform in India has few friends and many critics.”
The words written by him continue to be relevant even today. Therefore, eschewing criticism, we must lay emphasis on promoting social reform schemes through mutual cooperation. Many of these schemes have been designed by sub-groups of Chief Ministers under the aegis of the NITI Aayog.
Another important area of discussion in the Inter State Council is Education. India's greatest asset is its youth. More than 30 crore children are currently of school-going age. Hence, our country has the potential to provide the world with skilled manpower for many years to come. The Centre and the States must work together to provide our children an enabling environment in which they can develop their skills and prepare themselves for today's needs.
In the words of Pt. Deen Dayal Upadhyay: “Education is an investment. While planting trees, we do not charge them any fee.” We are aware that these trees will give us oxygen in the future, and benefit the environment. Likewise, education is also an investment that benefits the society.
Pt. Deen Dayal Upadhyay ji said this in 1965. Since then we have come a long way in terms of education. But a lot still remains to be done with regard to the standard of education. We must discuss the extent to which our system of education is genuinely educating our children.
The best way of improving the standard of education among children is to make them aware of the purpose of education. Merely going to school is not education. Education should generate curiosity among children. It should teach them how to attain and enhance knowledge. It should motivate them to continuously keep learning throughout their lives.
Swami Vivekananda also used to say that education does not mean merely attaining bookish knowledge. The aim of education is character building. Education means strengthening the mind, and enhancing one's intellect, so that one can become self-reliant.
Given the kind of efficiency and ability that is required in the economy of the 21st century, it is our responsibility to ensure that our youth are equipped with at least some skill-sets. We have to prepare our youth to think logically, think out of the box, and work creatively.
Internal Security is another important issue on the agenda today. We have to discuss internal security challenges confronting the country, the solutions to these challenges, and mutual cooperation in this regard. The internal security of the country cannot be strengthened until we focus on intelligence sharing, ensure greater coordination among agencies, and equip our police with modern approach and technology. While, we have come a long way, we need to continuously increase our efficiency and capacity. We must constantly remain alert and updated.
The meeting of the Inter State Council provides an opportunity for exchange of views in an extremely free and frank manner. I am sure you will share your thoughts and suggestions on all the agenda items. These will be of tremendous value.
The more we are able to forge consensus on these vital issues, the better we shall be able to tackle them. In doing so, we shall not only strengthen the spirit of cooperative federalism and Centre-State relations, but also secure a better future for our citizens.
#DELIMITER#
24 6 2016, Uzbekistan
SCO Summit
Your Excellency Mr. Ismail Karimov, 
President of the Republic of Uzbekistan, 
Leaders of the Members States of Shanghai 
Cooperation Organization; 
Invited Leaders 
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen
Almost a year ago, I started my journey of Central Asian countries from Tashkent. 
I still remember the warmth and generous welcome of Excellency Karimov and Uzbek people. 
Let me join others in thanking you Excellency Karimov for you hospitality and excellent arrangements for this meeting. 
At the Ufa Summit last year, conducted so ably by President Putin, the SCO leaders had accepted India as its full member. 
It was a landmark in India's engagement with SCO. 
Later today, we will sign the Memorandum of Obligations. 
With this we would formalize the process of India's membership of the SCO. 
And, as a logical extension India's age old ties with the region, one-sixth of humanity will join the family of SCO. 
We are indeed grateful to the SCO Member States and its leaders for their overwhelming support for India’s membership of the SCO. 
I also welcome Pakistan as the new member of the SCO and Belarus as a first time Observer to this body. 
Excellencies, 
India is not new to the region. Our historic linkages with you are centuries old. And, its just not geography that connects us. Our societies have been enriched by links of culture, cusine and commerce. 
They form the bed rock of our modern day relationships with Russia, China and the countries of Central Asia. 
Excellencies, 
With India as its full member, SCO boundaries would stretch from the Pacific to Europe; and from the Arctic to the Indian Ocean. 
We would represent forty percent of humanity and over a billion youth. 
To this group, India brings principles that are in tune with the philosophies of the SCO. 
India has always enjoyed good relations with the Eurasian land mass. 
We also share global goals of stability, security and prosperity in the Asia-Pacific. 
India would no doubt benefit from SCO's strengths in energy, natural resources and industry. 
In turn, India's strong economy and its vast market could drive economic growth in the SCO region. 
India's capacities in trade, investments, information and communication technology, Space, S&T, agriculture, health care, small and medium scale industry can bring wide spread economic benefit to the SCO countries. 
We can partner to develop human resources and institutional capacities in the region. 
Since our priorities match, our development experiences would be relevant to your national needs.
Excellencies, 
The interdependent world of twenty-first century is full of economic opportunities. 
It also faces geo-political complexities and security challenges. 
And, connectivity among the countries of the region is crucial to our economic prosperity. 
And, not just physical connectivity. 
What we need is seamless flow of goods, services, capital and people among ourselves. 
But, that alone is not enough. 
Our region also needs to nurture strong rail, road and air links with the rest of the world. 
Within SCO, India will be a productive partner in building strong trade, transport, energy, digital and people to people links. 
Our decision to join the international North South Transport Corridor, the Chabahar Agreement, and Ashgabat Agreement reflects this desire and intent. 
Excellencies, 
India's membership of SCO would contribute to region's prosperity. It would also strengthen its security. Our partnership will protect our societies from the threats of radical ideologies of hate, violence and terror. 
India will unite with SCO countries to work towards this goal. And, we will adopt zero tolerance and a comprehensive approach in fighting terrorism at all levels. 
With the same goal in sight, a stable, independent and peaceful Afghanistan is not just a sincere desire of each Afghan. It is also necessary for greater security and stability in the SCO region. 
In conclusion Mr. Chairman, 
I am confident that India's engagement with all SCO members will help us build a region: 
Which is an engine of economic growth for the world;Is more stable and secure internally; and Strongly connected with other geographies.
Excellencies, 
Next year, we look forward to attending SCO meeting in Astana, as equal partners. 
I wish all success to Kazhakstan in their Chairmanship of SCO in 2017. 
I once again thank the Government and the people of Uzbekistan for their hospitality and congratulate Excellency Karimov for conducting today’s successful meeting. 
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
17 5 2016, India
Joint statement with thailand prime minister
You Excellency Prime Minister General Prayut Chan-o-cha Ladies and Gentlemen
It is a great pleasure to welcome you to India.
Your visit is a high point in our top-level political exchanges.
You come from a land that is very familiar to us.
From the Legend of Rama to the Wisdom of Buddha our ties are founded on a shared cultural heritage. Our historical people-to-people ties provide a strong basis to our partnership.
Thailand is a trusted and valued friend, and one of our closest partners in Southeast Asia.
Friends,
Today, Prime Minister and I reviewed the full range of our bilateral engagement:
From culture to commerce;
From closer contacts between our peoples to deeper connectivity; and From counter-terrorism to defence and security.
We are both aware that rapid spread of terrorism and radical ideology poses a common challenge to both our societies.
And, we also recognize that our close security partnership would help us to secure our peoples from these threats.
In our shared objective to combat these challenges, India is particularly grateful to Thailand for its assistance and cooperation.
Beyond terrorism, we have agreed to further deepen our security engagement in the fields of cyber security, narcotics, transnational economic offenses and human trafficking.  
Friends,
The land frontiers of our two countries are not far apart.
And, we are also maritime neighbours.
So, Prime Minister and I have agreed to forge a closer partnership in the fields of defence and maritime cooperation.
A partnership to meet our bilateral interests ; and to respond to our shared regional goals.
And a partnership, which will be shaped by:
Sharing of expertise and experiences;
Greater staff exchanges and more exercises;
Cooperation on counter-piracy on seas;
Deeper engagement in naval patrolling; and Building linkages in the field of defence R&D and production.  
Friends,
Trade and commerce flows are an important lifeline of the interdependent world today.
Excellency and I agree that a more diversified commercial engagement between us would not only benefit both our economies. It would also enable greater regional economic prosperity.
In this context, we welcome the first meeting of the India-Thailand Joint Business Forum to be held later today. We encourage them, and the other business-sector stakeholders, to take lead in tapping the emerging business opportunities in both our countries.
Alongside trade, there are also ample avenues for greater manufacturing and investment linkages.
We see a particular synergy between Thai strengths in infrastructure, particularly tourism infrastructure, and India's priorities in this field.
Information Technology, pharmaceuticals, auto-components, and machinery are some other areas of promising collaboration.
We also see early conclusion of a balanced Comprehensive Economic and Partnership Agreement as our shared priority.  
Friends,
Prime Minister and I are fully aware that smooth flow of goods, services, capital and human resources between our economies needs a strong network of air, land and sea links.
We have, therefore, prioritized completion of India-Myanmar-Thailand Trilateral highway; and early signing of the Motor Vehicles Agreement between our three countries.
Connectivity is also an area of priority for India’s development.
Improving access to Southeast Asia from our Northeastern States benefits both our peoples.
Friends,
Stronger connectivity is essential not just for expanding bilateral trade ties. It also brings our people closer and facilitates enhanced science, education, culture and tourism cooperation.
Next year, to commemorate the seventy years of establishment of our diplomatic relations, we will celebrate Festival of India in Thailand, and Festival of Thailand in India.
This year, India is also celebrating one hundred and twenty-fifth birth anniversary of Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, the architect of Indian Constitution.
I am delighted that the Indian Constitution will soon be translated into Thai language.
I am also happy to announce that to welcome more tourists from Thailand to India, and to help them enjoy their visits to Buddhist sites in India, we will soon facilitate double entry e-tourist visas for citizens of Thailand.
Excellency,
India has always deeply appreciated the warmth and affection of the Royal Family of Thailand for India.
Her Royal Highness Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn has been a frequent and very welcome visitor to India.
We look forward to welcoming her in India again later this year.
We also look forward to the honour of receiving His Royal Highness Crown Prince Vajiralongkorn in India at his earliest convenience.
In conclusion, let me say that the convergence of Thailand's 'Look West', and India's 'Act East' policy lights the path to a bright future of our partnership.
Excellency, let me once again welcome you and your delegation to India.
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
9 6 2016, Mexico
Joint press statement with mexican president
Your Excellency President Enrique Peña Nieto 
Dear Friends, 
Muchas gracias, Señor Presidente!
Thank you, Mr. President for your generous welcome. 
I am particularly touched by your warmth and hospitality. Although this is my first visit to your great country as the Prime Minister, I had experienced the richness of your culture during my travel in early nineties as a common Indian. We are meeting for the third time in last two years. I have always found my conversations with you deeply stimulating. I truly value your friendship Mr. President.
Friends, Mexico was the first Latin American country to recognize India. Since then, the trajectory of our all round bilateral ties has shown growing intensity. In 2007 we established Privileged Partnership. Today, during our conversations, President and I held productive discussions on the entire range of bilateral relations, and on global issues of mutual interests. We have agreed to work and develop a roadmap of concrete outcomes to upgrade our ties to a Strategic Partnership.
Friends, 
Ties of business and investment are an important driver of our relationship. Mexico is an important partner for India’s energy security. We are now looking to move beyond a buyer-seller relationship, and into a long-term partnership. Information technology, energy, pharmaceuticals, and automotive industries are among key growth areas of our commercial linkages. But, there is potential to expand our commercial and investment, and Science and Technology partnerships in new areas. In this regard, President and I agreed to find ways to deepen our cooperation in Space, and science and technology. We will also prioritize concrete projects in areas of agricultural research; bio-technology; waste management; disaster warning and management, and solar energy. I would like to particularly thank President Pena Nieto for his support to the International Solar Alliance. It will transform the global canvas for solar technology, especially for developing and Small Island Developing countries.
Friends, 
President and I recognize the opportunities and challenges of this century. We both feel that our growing convergence on international issues allows us to join our capacities to strengthen international regimes of strategic importance. I thank President Pena Nieto for Mexico's positive and constructive support for India's membership of the NSG
Excellency, 
I see in you a reformer and believer in the destiny of this country. I too am focused on reforming India's economic and governance structures. This is one area where our sharing of best practices can benefit both our societies. Friends, In his book "In Light of India”, the great author Octavio Paz wrote, "I can understand what it means to be Indian, because I am Mexican”. Of course, it is true the other way too! I believe we have succeeded today in strengthening this mutual understanding further. It has been a wonderful visit. Excellency, I once again thank you for your welcome, your friendship and belief in India-Mexico friendship. And, I look forward to welcoming you Señor Presidente in India at the earliest opportunity.
Thank you, Thank you very much.
#DELIMITER#
8 6 2016, US
US Congress
Mr. Speaker,
Mr. Vice President, 
Distinguished Members of the U.S. Congress
Ladies and Gentlemen.
I am deeply honoured by the invitation to address this Joint Meeting of the U.S. Congress.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker for opening the doors of this magnificent Capitol.
This temple of democracy has encouraged and empowered other democracies the world over.
It manifests the spirit of this great nation, which in Abraham Lincoln's words, "was conceived in liberty and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal."
In granting me this opportunity, you have honoured the world's largest democracy and its 1.25 billion people.
As a representative of world's largest democracy, it is indeed a privilege to speak to the leaders of its oldest.
Mr. Speaker,
Two days ago, I began my visit by going to the Arlington National Cemetery -the final resting place of many brave soldiers of this great land. 
I honoured their courage and sacrifice for the ideals of freedom and democracy. 
It was also the seventy-second Anniversary of the D-Day. 
On that day, thousands from this great country fought to protect the torch of liberty on the remote shores of a land that they did not know. 
They sacrificed their lives so that the world lives in freedom. 
I applaud …India applauds, the great sacrifices of the men and women from 'The Land of the Free and the Home of the Brave' in service of mankind. 
India knows what this means because our soldiers too have fallen in distant battlefields for the same ideals.
That is why the threads of freedom and liberty form a strong bond between our two democracies.
Mr. Speaker,
Our nations may have been shaped by differing histories, cultures, and faiths. 
Yet, our belief in democracy for our nations and liberty for our countrymen is common. 
The idea that all citizens are created equal is a central pillar of the American constitution.
Our founding fathers too shared the same belief and sought individual liberty for every citizen of India. 
There were many who doubted India when, as a newly independent nation, we reposed our faith in democracy. 
Indeed, wagers were made on our failure. 
But, the people of India did not waver.
Our founders created a modern nation with freedom, democracy, and equality as the essence of its soul. 
And, in doing so, they ensured that we continued to celebrate our age old diversity.
Today, across its streets and institutions, in its villages and cities, anchored in equal respect for all faiths; and in the melody of hundreds of its languages and dialects.
India lives as one; India grows as one; India celebrates as one.
Mr. Speaker,
Modern India is in its 70th year. 
For my government, the Constitution is its real holy book. 
And, in that holy book, freedom of faith, speech and franchise, and equality of all citizens, regardless of background, are enshrined as fundamental rights. 
800 million of my countrymen may exercise the freedom of franchise once every five years.
But, all the 1.25 billion of our citizens have freedom from fear, a freedom they exercise every moment of their lives.
Distinguished Members,
Engagement between our democracies has been visible in the manner in which our thinkers impacted one another, and shaped the course of our societies. 
Thoreau's idea of civil disobedience influenced our political thoughts. 
And, similarly the call by the great sage of India Swami Vivekananda to embrace humanity was most famously delivered in Chicago.
Gandhi's non-violence inspired the heroism of Martin Luther King. 
Today, a mere distance of 3 miles separates the Martin Luther King memorial at Tidal Basin from the statue of Gandhi at Massachusetts Avenue. 
This proximity of their memorials in Washington mirrors the closeness of ideals and values they believed in.
The genius of Dr. B.R. Ambedkar was nurtured in the years he spent at the Columbia University a century ago.
The impact of the U.S. constitution on him was reflected in his drafting of the Indian constitution some three decades later. 
Our independence was ignited by the same idealism that fuelled your struggle for freedom.
No wonder then that former Prime Minister of India Atal Bihari Vajpayee called India and the U.S. 'natural allies'.
No wonder that the shared ideals and common philosophy of freedom shaped the bedrock of our ties. 
No wonder then, that President Obama has called our ties the defining partnership of the 21st century.
Mr. Speaker,
More than fifteen years ago, Prime Minister of India, Atal Bihari Vajpayee stood here and gave a call to step out of the 'shadow of hesitation' of the past. 
The pages of our friendship since then tell a remarkable story. 
Today, our relationship has overcome the hesitations of history. 
Comfort, candour and convergence define our conversations.
Through the cycle of elections and transitions of Administrations the intensity of our engagements has only grown.
And, in this exciting journey, the U.S. Congress has acted as its compass. 
You helped us turn barriers into bridges of partnership. 
In the fall of 2008, when the Congress passed the India-U.S. Civil Nuclear Cooperation Agreement, it changed the very colours of leaves of our relationship. 
We thank you for being there when the partnership needed you the most. 
You have also stood by us in times of sorrow. 
India will never forget the solidarity shown by the U.S. Congress when terrorists from across our border attacked Mumbai in November of 2008. 
And for this, we are grateful. 
Mr. Speaker, 
I am informed that the working of the U.S. Congress is harmonious. 
I am also told that you are well-known for your bipartisanship.
Well, you are not alone. 
Time and again, I have also witnessed a similar spirit in the Indian Parliament, especially in our Upper House.
So, as you can see, we have many shared practices.
Mr. Speaker, 
As this country knows well, every journey has its pioneers. 
Very early on, they shaped a development partnership even when the meeting ground was more limited. 
The genius of Norman Borlaug brought the Green Revolution and food security to India.
The excellence of the American Universities nurtured Institutes of Technology and Management in India.
And, I could go on.
Fast forward to today. 
The embrace of our partnership extends to the entirety of human endeavour-from the depths of the oceans to the vastness of the space. 
Our S&T collaboration continues to helps us in cracking the age-old problems in the fields of public health, education, food, and agriculture. 
Ties of commerce and investment are flourishing. We trade more with the U.S. than with any other nation. 
And, the flow of goods, services and capital between us generates jobs in both our societies. 
As in trade, so in defence. India exercises with the United States more than we do with any other partner. Defence purchases have moved from almost zero to ten billion dollars in less than a decade. 
Our cooperation also secures our cities and citizens from terrorists, and protects our critical infrastructure from cyber threats. 
Civil Nuclear Cooperation, as I told President Obama yesterday, is a reality.
Mr. Speaker,
Our people to people links are strong; and there is close cultural connect between our societies. 
SIRI tells us that India's ancient heritage of Yoga has over 30 million practitioners in the U.S..
It is estimated that more Americans bend for yoga than to throw a curve ball.
And, no Mr. Speaker, we have not yet claimed intellectual property right on Yoga.
Connecting our two nations is also a unique and dynamic bridge of three million Indian Americans. 
Today, they are among your best CEOs; academics; astronauts; scientists; economists; doctors; even spelling bee champions.
They are your strength. They are also the pride of India. They symbolize the best of both our societies.
Mr. Speaker,
My understanding of your great country began long before I entered public office. 
Long before assuming office, I travelled coast to coast, covering more than 25 States of America. 
I realized then that the real strength of the U.S. was in the dreams of its people and the boldness of their ambitions.
Today, Mr. Speaker, a similar spirit animates India. 
Our 800 million youth, especially, are particularly impatient. 
India is undergoing a profound social and economic change.
A billion of its citizens are already politically empowered. 
My dream is to economically empower them through many social and economic transformations. 
And, do so by 2022, the seventy-fifth anniversary of India's independence. 
My to-do list is long and ambitious. But you will understand. 
It includes:
· A vibrant rural economy with robust farm sector; 
· A roof over each head and electricity to all households; 
· To skill millions of our youth; 
· Build 100 smart cities; 
· Have a broad band for a billion, and connect our villages to the digital world; 
· And create a twenty-first century rail, road and port infrastructure.
These are not just aspirations; they are goals to be reached in a finite time-frame. 
And, to be achieved with a light carbon foot print, with greater emphasis on renewables.
Mr. Speaker,
In every sector of India's forward march, I see the U.S. as an indispensable partner. 
Many of you also believe that a stronger and prosperous India is in America's strategic interest.
Let us work together to convert shared ideals into practical cooperation.
There can be no doubt that in advancing this relationship, both nations stand to gain in great measure.
As the U.S. businesses search for new areas of economic growth, markets for their goods, a pool of skilled resources, and global locations to produce and manufacture, India could be their ideal partner. 
India's strong economy, and growth rate of 7.6% per annum, is creating new opportunities for our mutual prosperity. 
Transformative American technologies in India and growing investment by Indian companies in the United States both have a positive impact on the lives of our citizens. 
Today, for their global research and development centres, India is the destination of choice for the U.S. companies. 
Looking eastward from India, across the Pacific, the innovation strength of our two countries comes together in California. 
Here, the innovative genius of America and India's intellectual creativity are working to shape new industries of the future. 
Mr. Speaker, 
The 21st century has brought with it great opportunities. 
But, it also comes with its own set of challenges.
Inter-dependence is increasing. 
But, while some parts of the world are islands of growing economic prosperity; other are mired in conflicts.
In Asia, the absence of an agreed security architecture creates uncertainty. 
Threats of terror are expanding, and new challenges are emerging in cyber and outer-space.
And, global institutions conceived in 20th century, seem unable to cope with new challenges or take on new responsibilities.
In this world full of multiple transitions and economic opportunities; growing uncertainties and political complexities; existing threats and new challenges; our engagement can make a difference by promoting:
· Cooperation not dominance;
· Connectivity not isolation;
· Respect for Global Commons; 
· inclusive not exclusive mechanisms; and above all 
· adherence to international rules and norms. 
India is already assuming her responsibilities in securing the Indian Ocean region. 
A strong India-U.S. partnership can anchor peace, prosperity and stability from Asia to Africa and from Indian Ocean to the Pacific.
It can also help ensure security of the sea lanes of commerce and freedom of navigation on seas. 
But, the effectiveness of our cooperation would increase if international institutions framed with the mindset of the 20th century were to reflect the realities of today.
Mr. Speaker, 
Before arriving in Washington D.C., I had visited Herat in Western Afghanistan to inaugurate Afghan-India Friendship Dam, a 42 MW hydro-electric project built with Indian assistance.
I was also there on the Christmas day last year to dedicate to that proud nation its Parliament, a testimony to our democratic ties. 
Afghans naturally recognize that the sacrifices of American have helped create a better life. 
But, your contribution in keeping the region safe and secure is deeply appreciated even beyond.
India too has made an enormous contribution and sacrifices to support our friendship with Afghan people. 
A commitment to rebuild a peaceful, and stable and prosperous Afghanistan our shared objective.
Yet, Distinguished Members, not just in Afghanistan, but elsewhere in South Asia, and globally, terrorism remains the biggest threat. 
In the territory stretching from West of India's border to Africa, it may go by different names, from Laskhar-e-Taiba, to Taliban to ISIS.
But, it’s philosophy is common: of hate, murder and violence. 
Although it's shadow is spreading across the world, it is incubated in India's neighbourhood.
I commend the members of the U.S. Congress for sending a clear message to those who preach and practice terrorism for political gains. 
Refusing to reward them is the first step towards holding them accountable for their actions.
The fight against terrorism has to be fought at many levels. 
And, the traditional tools of military, intelligence or diplomacy alone would not be able to win this fight. 
Mr. Speaker,
We have both lost civilians and soldiers in combating it.
The need of the hour is for us to deepen our security cooperation. 
And, base it on a policy:
· that isolates those who harbour, support and sponsor terrorists;
· that does not distinguish between "good" and "bad" terrorists; and that delinks religion from terrorism.
Also, for us to succeed, those who believe in humanity must come together to fight for it as one, and speak against this menace in one voice.
Terrorism must be delegitimized.
Mr. Speaker,
The benefits of our partnership extend not just to the nations and regions that need it most. 
On our own, and by combining our capacities, we are also responding to other global challenges including when disaster strikes and where humanitarian relief is needed.
Far from our shores, we evacuated thousands from Yemen, Indians, Americans and others. 
Nearer home, we were the first responders during Nepal's earthquake, in the Maldives water crisis and most recently during landslide in Sri Lanka. 
We are also one of the largest contributors of troops to UN Peace Keeping Operations.
Often, India and the U.S. have combined their strengths in science, technology and innovation to help fight hunger, poverty, diseases and illiteracy in different parts of the world.
The success of our partnership is also opening up new opportunities for learning, security and development from Asia to Africa. 
And, the protection of environment and caring for the planet is central to our shared vision of a just world. 
For us in India, to live in harmony with mother earth is part of our ancient belief.
And, to take from nature only what is most essential is part of our civilizational ethos. 
Our partnership, therefore, aims to balance responsibilities with capabilities.
And, it also focuses on new ways to increase the availability and use of renewable energy. 
A strong U.S. support for our initiative to form an International Solar Alliance is one such effort. 
We are working together not just for a better future for ourselves, but for the whole world. 
This has also been the goal of our efforts in G-20, East Asia Summit and Climate Change summits. 
Mr. Speaker and Distinguished Members
As we deepen our partnership, there would be times when we would have differing perspectives.
But, since our interests and concerns converge, the autonomy in decision making and diversity in our perspectives can only add value to our partnership.
So, as we embark on a new journey, and seek new goals, let us focus not just on matters routine but transformational ideas. 
Ideas which can focus: 
· Not just on creating wealth but also creating value for our societies;
· Not just on immediate gains but also long term benefits;
· Not just on sharing best practices but also shaping partnerships; and
· Not just on building a bright future for our peoples, but in being a bridge to a more united, humane and prosperous world. 
And, important for the success of this journey would be a need to view it with new eyes and new sensitivities.
When we do this, we will realise the full promise of this extraordinary relationship.
Mr. Speaker, 
My final thoughts and words would reiterate that our relationship is primed for a momentous future. 
The constraints of the past are behind us and foundations of the future are firmly in place. 
In the lines of Walt Whitman, 
"The Orchestra have sufficiently tuned their instruments, the baton has given the signal."
And to that, if I might add, there is a new symphony in play. 
Thank you Mr. Speaker and Distinguished members for this honour.
Thank you very much.
#DELIMITER#
8 6 2016, USA
US India Business Council
Ladies & Gentlemen,
I am delighted to be here again amidst such a large and distinguished gathering of political and business leaders. Earlier today, I had the pleasure of meeting President Obama and we shared our thoughts on a wide range of issues concerning our two nations. India’s bilateral relationship with the United States is stronger than ever and we both agreed that the future would be even brighter.
I am speaking to you at a time when the global economy continues to be weak. Several parts of the world are still facing very difficult conditions. This is a time when the world needs new engines of growth. From the point of view of the world’s oldest democracy, obviously it would be nice if the new engines are democratic engines. I am happy to tell you that today India is poised to contribute as a new engine of global growth.
A larger Indian economy has multiple benefits for the world. Obviously, India presents a large and growing market. But India is much more than a market. India is
a reliable partner;
a source of high quality scientific, engineering and managerial talent;
a crucible of development ideas and experiments;
an efficient source of high quality R&D;
and a testimony that democracy and rapid growth can co-exist.
As India embarks on a new era of development, it needs to learn much from America’s tradition of entrepreneurship and innovation. America remains at the forefront of scientific and technological innovation from
air traffic control to air quality improvement,
from drugs to drones,
from hybrid cars to hydro fracking.
Indeed, to me, America is not just a country with a great past; it is a country with an exciting future. I am therefore sure, that ours will be a partnership which sees both nations benefit. 
A very unique feature of the Indo-American relationship is the critical role of the Indian-American community in the US economy. It is rare that emigrants from one nation, who become immigrants in another, enjoy such high respect and repute in both countries. Indian-Americans are a powerful cementing force in our growing economic and cultural ties. 
I have just completed two years in office. When I addressed you in 2014, I had just taken over the reins of government. We faced a particularly challenging domestic and external environment. Confidence of investors was at a low. Doubts were being expressed about the future of the Indian economy. The business community was unhappy with the inertia and stagnation that had set in. There was frustration with archaic policies and red tape. In 2 years, we have managed to overcome the odds and register an impressive economic performance. 
I want to take this opportunity to describe to you the key elements of our policies. I have said several times that my aim is to reform to transform. For me, reforms are those policies that transform the lives of ordinary citizens. In the last two years, we have taken a comprehensive package of reforms which go beyond more economic reforms. I can classify them into four types.
First, macro-economic policies to create a strong foundation;
Second, policies to stimulate growth and employment through investment and trade, and to increase efficiency and productivity;
Third, policies to ensure that growth benefits the poor and the weaker sections of society, including women and farmers;
Fourth, a frontal attack on corruption.
Let me start with the macro-economy. 
Since we took office, inflation, the fiscal deficit and the balance of payments current account deficit have all fallen. GDP growth, Foreign exchange reserves, stock market valuations, and investor confidence have all increased. This success is the result of a series of well thought out policies. We have legislated a monetary framework with inflation targeting and an independent monetary policy committee to curb inflation. We embarked on a course of fiscal consolidation and our fiscal deficit has been reduced substantially in each of three budgets so far. Even while cutting the fiscal deficit, we have greatly increased productive public investment. 
This has been made possible in two ways. Firstly, we imposed carbon taxes on fossil fuels. We took the bold step of de-controlling diesel prices and thereby eliminated energy subsidies. We then replaced them with taxes. A Clean Environment cess has been increased by eight times from Rs.50 per ton to Rs.400 per ton. Globally, there is much talk of carbon taxes but much of it is just that – TALK. We have actually acted. Secondly we have reduced wasteful expenditure through innovative methods and use of technology. Subsidies are increasingly credited directly to bank accounts of the deserving with fool proof biometric identification. 
Let me now turn to our policies to stimulate growth and employment. This audience is probably aware of the sweeping liberalization that we have undertaken in foreign direct investment. We have put most sectors on automatic approval and opened up sectors like defence and railways to foreign investment. The long pending insurance law reform was successfully passed. Several insurance companies, including American companies, have already enhanced their investment in the insurance sector. We have taken major steps to increase the ‘Ease of Doing Business’ and have already begun climbing steeply in the global rankings. We are encouraging foreign and domestic investors to set up high quality and efficient manufacturing facilities. We have greatly enhanced investment in roads, railways, ports and waterways to improve logistics. We have made major process improvements in our ports to reduce the time taken for cargo to enter and exit. We admire the start up eco-system in your country. We are making a beginning in replicating it. Our Start-Up India programme has stimulated a new breed of innovators. In 2016, Bengaluru has become the fifth most preferred location for innovation centres. It was not even in the top 10 in 2015.
For our economy to succeed, we need a strong banking system. We inherited a system where cronyism and corruption were believed to be rampant in banking decisions and in appointments to public sector banks. I held the first ever retreat of a Prime Minister with bankers. We have set up clear performance measures and accountability mechanisms. We are committed to ensuring adequate capital. Interference in banking decisions has ended. A new process for appointments has been put in place under a Bank Boards Bureau. Credible and capable bankers have been appointed to head banks. For the first time since banks were nationalized 47 years ago private sector professionals have been appointed in key positions. 
I now turn to our policies to ensure that growth is inclusive. We have brought two hundred million people into the banking system through the Jan Dhan Yojana. This is more than the population of most countries in the world. Now, these millions are part of our banking system, and words like ‘interest rate’ have a meaning for them. These people have shown that there is great strength at the bottom of the pyramid. Believe it or not, accounts opened under the Jan Dhan Yojana today have a total balance of almost six billion dollars. 
The Jan Dhan Yojana has also transformed the ability of the poor to make and to receive electronic payments. Every Jan Dhan account holder is eligible for a debit card. India’s banks and post offices are also being encouraged to operate ‘mobile ATMs’. A mobile ATM is one where cash can be drawn and simple banking tasks done through a hand held device. 
We have provided a safety net through new social security schemes. We have introduced three non-subsidised but low cost schemes covering accident insurance, life insurance and pensions. Because of their massive coverage the premia are low. There are now over 120 million subscribers. 
We have paid special attention to gender justice and to empowering women. We have a new savings programme to help pay for girls’ education with a special high rate of interest. To relieve rural women from the health hazards of cooking with firewood, we are giving 50 million new gas connections in poor rural areas. Under our new self-employment financing programme (Mudra), over 70% of the beneficiaries are women. More than 27 million new women-headed businesses have been assisted. We have changed our policies to allow women in combat roles in the armed forces. New rules are increasing the representation of women on corporate Boards of Directors. 
Agriculture remains India’s mainstay in terms of providing livelihood. There was a tendency to deprive farmers of subsidized fertilizer by diverting it for the production of chemicals. A simple but very effective solution is neem-coating of fertilizer which makes it unsuitable for diversion. We have moved towards universal neem-coating of urea. It has already saved crores of rupees of diverted farm subsidies and improved fertilizer availability to farmers. It is an example of how simple reforms can be very effective. 
We have introduced a Soil Health Card nationally, which tells every farmer the condition of his or her soil. It enables the farmer to choose the best crop and right quantity and mix of inputs. This greatly reduces wastage of inputs and increases crop yield besides protecting the soil. By reducing unnecessary chemical inputs, it is also good for health of consumers. It reduces costs, increases yields, improves the environment and protects the health of consumers. 140 million soil health cards will be issued, requiring a collection of over twenty-five million soil samples, and tested through a nationwide network of nearly 1500 laboratories. 
This brings me to an achievement that I think even our worst critics do not dispute. This is the change in levels of corruption. For many years, economists and other experts have held corruption to be one of the main constraints on the growth of any developing economy. We have taken decisive steps to curb corruption. I have already referred to what has been done in public sector banks. We removed discretion in allocation of key resources and moved to transparent auctions of mines, spectrum and FM radio licenses and we have plugged leakage through direct benefit transfer. We have revamped our personnel management to ensure that senior positions are held by persons of integrity. We have launched an on-going campaign against tax evasion and black money. The poor are the greatest beneficiaries of the reduction in corruption. 
Looking to the future let me outline what I see as the path we will follow in the coming years. 
Firstly, we will continue to have disciplined and prudent macro-economic policies. I firmly believe that sound macro-economic fundamentals are a necessary foundation for long term sustainable growth. 
Secondly, we will combine this with a continued stress on inclusion and equity. This is to ensure the fruits of development accrue not to a few, not to many but to all Indians. And this will also mean continuing our attack on corruption. 
Thirdly, we will continue to make progress on improving the investment climate and Ease of Doing Business. We want to make India a destination which not only welcomes business but where it is easy to do business. We have largely achieved the first by drastically liberalizing our foreign direct investment policies. We have made a good beginning on the second and will continue to make further improvements. 
We will continue to strengthen the "Make in India” initiative. It is not intended for only manufacturing for the domestic market or import substitution. It is as much about making world-class products and services for the whole globe. That is why, for us, improvements towards free trade are important. It is very important for us that developed countries open their markets, not only to goods from countries like India but also to services. I see this as a win-win proposition for the U.S. and for India. India is the future human resource powerhouse of the world with a young hard-working population. In my vision, a partnership between American capital and innovation, and Indian human resources and entrepreneurship can be very powerful. I am convinced we can strengthen both our economies through such a partnership. 
We will continue to make our tax policies more predictable. We have made major strides towards predictability by signing a number of Advance Pricing Agreements with the United States. We are committed to taking this further. At the same time, like the U.S., we are cracking down on tax evasion and unfair tax avoidance. 
We will continue to open up our defence sector. I am aware that licensing policies can sometimes slow down the process of investing in India’s defence sector. We are exploring a simpler and more efficient project licensing approach for defence. In the field of nuclear energy, we are purchasing six nuclear reactors from Westinghouse which will mark a new era in our nuclear and scientific cooperation. I was delighted when GE became one of the first companies to make a major investment in the newly liberalized railway sector. It is setting up a locomotive manufacturing plant in the relatively poor state of Bihar. I expect many more such investments. 
The river Ganga has a special significance for India. The ‘Namami Gange” programme to clean the river Ganga is on the verge of taking off. It will be a big priority over the coming years. This project offers major opportunities for American companies with their expertise in environmental engineering, water and sewage treatment and the like. This project is a high priority for my Government and our aim is to restore the Ganga to its pristine glory.
Ladies and Gentlemen, we have begun our journey towards a transformed India. A transformed India, with one sixth of humanity will mean a transformed world. The journey will be long. But the progress we have achieved so far, convinces me that we will reach our destination. I invite you to join us on that journey. It is a journey which offers the exciting possibility of not only building a better balance sheet for your company but of building a better India, building a better America, and building a better world. 
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
4 6 2016, Afghanistan
Inaugration of salma dam
I am delighted to return to Afghanistan;
Honoured to be among people who have set the standard of courage for our age;
Privileged to see again the high tide of friendship in this vast ocean of love for India.
This is yet another giant step in Afghanistan’s march to progress.
And, it is a historic moment of emotion and pride in the relations between Afghanistan and India.
Thank you, Mr. President, for your invitation and for naming this dam as Afghanistan-India Friendship Dam. We are truly humbled by the generosity of the Afghan spirit.
Rivers have been bearers of great civilisations of the world. In the flow of rivers runs the course of human progress.
In the Holy Quran, river is central to the image of Paradise.
In the ancient scriptures of India, rivers defined our nation and were celebrated as the giver of life.
And, it is a wise Afghan proverb that says, Kabul be zar basha be barf ne: May Kabul be without gold rather than snow.
For the snow feeds the rivers that sustain life and agriculture.
So, today, we are not just launching a project that will irrigate land and light up homes.
We are reviving a region, restoring hope, renewing life and redefining Afghanistan’s future.
The dam is a generator not just of electricity but also of optimism and belief in the future of Afghanistan.
The project would not just irrigate the fields of six hundred and forty villages in Chiste, Obe, Pashtun Zarghun, Karokh, Gozara, Injil, Zindjan, Kohsan and Ghoryan .
It would also bring light to over two hundred and fifty thousand homes in this area.
Last December, in Kabul, I was moved by the honour of inaugurating the Afghan Parliament Building.
It was a tribute to the epic struggle of the Afghan people to shape their future by vote and debate, not gun and violence.On this summer day, in Herat, we come together to honour and celebrate Afghan determination to build a future of prosperity.Afghans and Indians dreamt of this project in the nineteen seventies. The lost decades speak to us about the ravages of a long drawn war.
It was a war not of Afghan making, but it was one that stole the future of an entire generation of Afghans.
And, when a new dawn broke over Afghanistan in 2001, we resumed the project.
With resolve and patience, courage and belief, we have together overcome distance and hurdles, threats and violence.Today, the brave Afghan people are sending a message that the forces of destruction and death, denial and domination, shall not prevail.
They will not come in the way of the dreams and aspirations of the Afghan people.
The fields that produce the finest fruits and saffron shall once again come alive with the clear waters of the river.
The homes that lived through dark nights of dread will now be lit by the power of hope.
Men and women shall once again work the farms and ply their trade with the joy of hard work, in peace and security.The shoulders that were once weighed down in the shadow of guns would now bear ploughs to turn the land green.
Children shall again believe in the possibility of a future of education and opportunity.
And, another young girl poet will not have to live a life of pain, denial and longing, or see a life of promise cut short. Herat has time and again seen sublime glory and tragic ruin. And, the city that once Jalaluddin Rumi held as the finest, will rise again.
The city that was the gateway to the West, South and Central Asia,will once again be the hub that will unite the regions in a peaceful pursuit of prosperity.
So, to the people and Government of Herat and the Government of Afghanistan, I express our deepest appreciation for your support, patience and understanding – and, above all, your belief in us.
This dam has not been built by bricks and mortar, but by the faith of our friendship and the valour of Afghans and Indians.And, at this moment of pride, we also stand in grief and gratitude for lives sacrificed so that Afghan people will have a future they so richly deserve and so deeply desire.
The blood, sweat and tears of our people are mixed into this earth and have formed between us an eternal bond, written into the soil of this land.
Bonds that remind us of ancient links between this region and India.
For many, the Harirud River is one strand of our connected histories since the ancient Vedic times.
Today, the world will see the Harirud River as an abiding emblem of our commitment to a shared future of progress.And, the Friendship Dam unites us in solidarity as Chishti Sharif joined us in spirit centuries ago.
For, it is from here that the Chishti Silsila or Chishti tradition of Sufism came to India. Its glorious tradition and teachings resonate through the dargahs of Ajmer, Delhi and Fatehpur Sikri.
It draws people from all faiths with its message of love, peace, compassion; of harmony among people of all beliefs; of respect for all of God’s creations; and service to humanity.
Indians and Afghans know that these values, not extremism and violence, define Afghanistan - a nation brimming with poetry of love and spiritual tradition of peace and harmony.
And, these are the values that give the great Afghan people the patience and persistence to seek peace with their own who have chosen the path of violence and also with those who support them.
Afghans have pursued this path, despite the strength of their belief that they can defend their freedom like no other people on this earth.
And, it is on the foundation of these values that Afghans and Indians seek each other, not because they harbour designs against another.
Khwaja Moiunuddin Chishti, the first of the Chishti saints in India, said that human beings must have the affection of the sun, the generosity of the river and the hospitality of the earth.
He not only had the magnificent landscape of his ancestral land in mind, he could also be describing the Afghan people.So, when I came to Kabul in December, in the warmth of your welcome, I saw the kindness of your heart.
In your clear eyes, I saw the deep well of affection for India.
In your smiles, I saw the joy of this relationship.
In the firmness of your embrace, I felt the trust in our friendship.
And, in those memorable hours, India witnessed once again the grace of your people, the beauty of this land and the friendship of a nation.
Today, I return with the gratitude and admiration of 1.25 billion people.
And, a renewed pledge for our partnership.
Together, our partnership has built schools, health centres and irrigation facilities for rural communities.
It has empowered women with skills and the youth with the education to shoulder the responsibility for Afghanistan’s future.
We have joined hands to build roads that bridge the distances of your country, from Zaranj to Delaram, and transmission lines that bring power to your homes.
Now, India’s investment in the port at Chahbahar in Iran will give Afghanistan a new route to the world and a new path to prosperity.
And, to implement that vision,just last month, President Ghani joined President Rouhani of Iran and me in witnessing the signing of the Chahbahar Trade and Transit Agreement between Afghanistan, Iran and India.
The fruits of our friendship are not confined to Kabul, Kandahar , Mazar and Herat. They will never be.
Our cooperation will extend to every part of Afghanistan. Our partnership will benefit every section of Afghan society.
Because across its difficult geography, and across its diversity, and beyond the identities as Pushtuns, Tajiks, Uzbeks and Hazaras, Afghanistan must live and prosper as one.
For, divisions among Afghan people will only help those who seek to dominate the nation from outside.
As we work together, we draw strength and confidence from your deep commitment to protect our partnership from the designs of others.
When our people are under attack, the brave Afghans guard us as their own. They put themselves in the line of fire so that their Indian friends are safe.
This is the nobility of your heart and the strength of your friendship.
I have seen this from the moment I assumed office as Prime Minister.
For on that day, when terrorists launched a massive attack on our Consulate in this city of Herat, the heroic efforts of Afghan soldiers, and of our personnel, saved many lives and prevented a big tragedy.
Mr. President, Friends,
Afghanistan’s success is a deeply held hope and desire of every Indian. It comes from the love and admiration for Afghans in our hearts.
We want to see your democracy strike deep roots; your people unite; and, your economy prosper.
We want to see your art, culture and poetry thrive. And, we want to see your cricketers join the ranks of test players and also seek glory in IPL.
But, it also comes from the recognition that when Afghanistan succeeds, the world will be safer and more beautiful. When the values that define Afghans prevail, terrorism and extremism will be in retreat.
Because we know that extremism and terrorism cannot stop at your border or end at the boundaries of our region.
So, in the spreading unrest of our times, the world cannot forget the brave struggle that the Afghan people are waging - for themselves and our world.
India will not forget or turn away.
As I said then, and I will say it again, your friendship is our honour; your dreams are our duty.
India’s capacity may be limited, but our commitment is without limits.
Our resources may be modest, but our will is boundless.
For others, their commitments may have a sunset clause, but our relationship is timeless.
We face barriers of geography and politics, but we define our path from the clarity of our purpose.
We see resistance and suspicion of others, but our resolve is strong and your faith and trust guides us forward.
Where some doubt your future, we are certain that no force or power can deny the Afghan people the destiny they have chosen, however long and hard the journey may be.
So, on international platforms and in regional forums, we will speak in one voice for the Afghan right to a peaceful, prosperous, united, inclusive and democratic nation.
And, in the fields, villages and cities of Afghanistan, we will work together for that future.
And, whatever happens, in a bright or a dark moment, we will always experience, as Herat’s great Sufi Poet, Hakim Jami, would say, the freshness and happiness of the gentle breeze of friendship.
Thank you for this honour, this affection and this friendship.
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
27 5 2016, India
North east India
Before arriving on the stage here, I visited an exhibition of stalls set up by Self-Help Groups comprising women from all eight North Eastern States. The artefacts and products displayed in this exhibition are indeed impressive. Let me begin by congratulating the ladies from these Self-Help Groups, who are present here today and have just given me a glimpse of their immense talent.
The promotion of Self Help Groups has got a boost from the Deen Dayal Antyodaya Yojana. A large number of Self Help Groups are also benefiting through credit linkages by North Eastern Development Financial Institution with the component of interest subsidy being provided by Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region.
The Government is committed to the development of Self Help Groups, particularly Women Self Help Groups. Keeping this in mind, in December 2015, the Union Cabinet approved a Special Package Fund for the North Eastern States. The objective is to accelerate the implementation of the National Rural Livelihood Mission, so as to cover two-thirds of all rural households in North Eastern States by 2023-24.
Friends.
Today, I unveiled a plaque for the foundation stone of a football stadium. We are all aware of the love that the people of the North-East, and especially Meghalaya, have for Football. Football is a passion here and is played in every nook and corner. We are all familiar with famous football players such as Eugeneson Lyngdoh, Aibor Khongjee, and Marlangki Suting. They have done both the country and the State proud, by representing India in International Tournaments, and their clubs in the Indian Super League.
I am told that the State Government’s Meghalaya Mission Football aims at detecting talent at the grass-root level and providing support for grooming and nurturing promising children and youngsters as professional footballers. I am sure that the football stadium being constructed at a cost of 38 crore rupees with the support of the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region, will go a long way towards fulfilling this objective.
Next year, that is in 2017, India is hosting the Under-17 FIFA World Cup. We need to take advantage of this event being held in India; and ensure the spread and development of this sport not only in the North Eastern Region, but also in other parts of the country.
Meghalaya has a large number of football clubs and associations. Perhaps, you can organize competitive local tournaments and lead the way for other parts of the country, to build a series of major events leading to the Under-17 World Cup.
Friends.
We all know Cherrapunji, for being the place that receives the highest rainfall in the World. Today, another feather has been added to its cap. The Doppler Weather Radar at Cherrapunji has been dedicated to the Nation. I congratulate the Indian Space Research Organization; Bharat Electronics Ltd.; and the Indian Meteorological Department for setting up this Radar in Cherrapunji.
The North East, a land of beauty and adventure, has been hit by several natural calamities in the recent past, on account of heavy rain and landslides.
This Weather Radar System will enable better weather forecasts, especially for the North Eastern region. This should help in minimizing the threat posed by extreme weather conditions.
Earlier today, I had an opportunity to participate in the North Eastern Council Meeting and interact with the Governors and Chief Ministers of this region. This gave me an opportunity to get a glimpse of the development work being carried out in the North East. A lot is being done. Much more still needs to be done.
My Government has been proactively following the ‘Act East Policy’. I consider the North Eastern Region as the Gateway to South-East Asia. As part of this policy, it is our mission to upgrade the infrastructure in Road, Rail, Telecom, Power and Waterways in the region. And today, as part of that mission, I have flagged off three new trains. We are committed to connect all North Eastern States with the country’s railway network. Since the formation of the NDA Government at the Centre, we have spent more than Ten Thousand Crore Rupees for development of the railway network in the North East. The Railway Ministry plans to spend more than Five Thousand Crore Rupees during the current year for the same.
In November, 2014, Meghalaya and Arunachal Pradesh were brought on the rail map of India. Recently, Agartala in Tripura has been connected with a broad gauge railway line. Today is indeed a red letter day in the history of the North-East. Broad Gauge Passenger Trains will now connect the States of Manipur and Mizoram. Today, Kamakhya in Guwahati has been directly connected with Vaishno Devi in Katra, near Jammu.
We are opening up both Road and Rail routes to our neighbouring countries. This will give a boost to the economic development of the region.
The Union Government has incorporated a special Corporation named ‘National Highways and Infrastructure Development Corporation’ in July 2014, for the development of Highways in the North Eastern region. This Corporation is constructing three new bridges on Brahmaputra River. It is implementing 34 road projects in the North Eastern Region to construct around 1,000 kilometers of roads at a total cost of over Ten Thousand Crore Rupees. The North East Road Sector Development Scheme has been started, with an aim to connect every district in the region with a National Highway.
The development of inland waterways has been given a boost. The Union Government has declared 19 Waterways in the North East as National Waterways.
We are committed to provide 24 by 7 electricity to all the people. Keeping this in mind, the Union Government is making heavy investment in the power sector. Two projects covering all the eight North Eastern States are being implemented at a cost of around Ten Thousand Crore Rupees for improving power transmission.
The commissioning of the Bishwanath-Chariyali to Agra transmission network has made available 500 Megawatts of power in the region from outside. Out of the 18,000 unelectrified villages in the country, we have already connected more than 7000 villages with electricity. I expect that no village in the country, including the North Eastern States, will be left without electricity by 2018.
The Government is implementing a comprehensive Telecom Plan for the North Eastern Region at a cost of over 5,300 crore rupees. Agartala has become the third city in India to be connected with an International Gateway through Cox Bazar of Bangladesh. This has improved telecom connectivity and will give a boost to the economic development of the region.
During my last visit to Gangtok a few months ago, Sikkim was declared as the First Organic State in the country. Other North Eastern States can take a lead from Sikkim to become Organic States. In fact, the North Eastern Region has the potential to become Organic Food Basket of India. This will increase the income of the farmers.
Friends.
Today one need not go through the tedious scrutiny of a banker to get small loans. The Union Government has launched the Pradhan Mantri Mudra Yojana, under which collateral free loans are provided to small business entrepreneurs. During 2015-16, more than three crore forty eight lakh entrepreneurs have been sanctioned loans worth more than one lakh thirty seven thousand crore rupees. Of these, six lakh loans have been sanctioned in the North Eastern States for a value of around 2800 Crore Rupees.
Similarly, 93 Lakh bank accounts have been opened in the region under the Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana. Around 21 Lakh people have been enrolled under the Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana. Around 19 Lakh people have been enrolled under the Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana.
The Textile Sector provides employment to most people after agriculture. Within the sector, it is the apparel segment that provides maximum employment. A large number of women are employed in the segment.
In order to boost industrial activity and employment under the North East Region Textile Promotion scheme, one apparel and garment making centre is being set up in each of the eight states at a cost of Rupees One Hundred and Forty Five Crores. Out of the eight centres, seven centres have already been completed, each having three units.
Friends.
Meghalaya has a distinct historical, cultural and ethnic heritage. It is blessed with natural beauty and wildlife. There is no reason for a tourist to not want to visit Meghalaya. There is a tremendous opportunity for tourism, as well as adventure tourism, in the North Eastern Region, particularly, Meghalaya.
We need to develop Tourist Circuits by providing better facilities to tourists, in terms of improved road connectivity, hotels, and cleanliness. The Union Government has launched a new scheme of Swadesh Darshan, under which it is developing Tourist Circuits in the country. One such circuit is proposed for the North East.
Less than two years ago, on 2nd October, 2014, the Union Government started its journey to create Swachh Bharat by October 2019, as a tribute to Mahatma Gandhi, ‘The Father of the Nation’. In exactly one year, from 15th August, 2014 to 15th August, 2015, under the Swachh Bharat – Swachh Vidyalay Programme, we have constructed four lakh seventeen thousand toilets in over two lakh schools.
The Swachh Bharat Mission is a public movement for cleanliness. The biggest beneficiaries of this movement are the poorest of the poor. I request all of you to actively participate in the movement and ensure an open defecation free society and clean environment.
I am happy to note that the traditions of hygiene and cleanliness in the region got a boost with the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan. Mawlyynong village in Meghalaya, the cleanest village, and the entire state of Sikkim, including Gangtok, have become major tourist attractions.
I would like to congratulate all the winners of the run with the theme ‘North East leads the way – Swachh Bharat Abhiyan’. I congratulate the North Eastern Council for organizing the run. Gangtok deserves applause for being ranked the cleanest city of the North East.
Congratulations to the people of Meghalaya for hosting the North Eastern Council Plenary Meeting in Shillong. I also express my gratitude to all of you for giving me the opportunity for a wonderful interaction.
Jai Hind.
#DELIMITER#
27 5 2016, India
plenary session of north east council
The North Eastern Council was set up in 1972. Since then it has contributed to the development of the North East region. To meet the growing aspirations of the people, it is important that the North Eastern Council introspects and assesses the extent to which it has been able to achieve its objectives. Perhaps, there is a need to re-orient and upgrade the North Eastern Council. You may like to consider developing the North Eastern Council as a state-of-the-art resource centre for the North Eastern states with the necessary resources, knowledge and skills. The resource centre may enable the states and the implementing agencies to properly plan and execute projects, promote research and innovations and provide strategic policy vision for the region.
The North Eastern Council may look into developing a specialised domain expertise either by itself or through an agency model to assist states and central ministries in their development planning as also problem solving needs. This will enable the imbibing of good governance and best practices in the region. The North Eastern Council should also consider focussing on issues in emerging areas of livelihood, entrepreneurship, venture funds, start-ups and skill development. All this will help in generating jobs.
The government has been focussing on the development of the North East region through its pro-active “Act East Policy”. As part of this policy, we are focussing on reducing the isolation of the region by improving all round connectivity through road, rail, telecom, power and waterways sectors.
If the western region of the country can develop, if other regions of the country can develop, I see no reason why the North East region of the country cannot develop. I am also convinced that India can move forward if all the regions develop including the North East region. The North East region is also very important to us for strategic reasons. And it is my conviction that we have to bring this region at par with the other developed regions of the country.
In the current Budget, more than Rs.30,000 crores have been earmarked for the North East region. It should be our endeavour to ensure that this money is spent well for the development of the region.
We believe in cooperative and competitive federalism. States that are strong and want to grow further, need to be given adequate authority and resources. And States that are not so strong, need to be given needful assistance. It is in this regard that based on the report of the Committee of Chief Ministers, we have decided to continue to provide assistance in the ratio of 90:10 for core Central schemes and 80:20 for non-core schemes to the North Eastern States.
In the recent past, we have established two important projects in Assam - Brahmaputra Cracker and Polymer Limited and Numaligarh Refinery Limited’s wax unit. These are big projects that would create huge employment opportunities in the North East region. However, it has taken us many years to complete these projects. We have to ensure that we are able to complete our projects in time and without cost over-runs. Only then can we realise the true benefits of these projects.
The North East is the gateway to South East Asia and we need to take advantage of this. We are opening up both road and rail routes to our neighbouring countries. This should give a boost to the economic development of the region.
We have created a specialised highways construction agency for the North East - the “National Highways and Infrastructure Development Corporation” - that was incorporated on 18th July 2014. Since then it has set up its Branch Offices, one each in every North Eastern State. As of today, it is implementing 34 projects in the North Eastern States covering a length of 1001 kilometres at a total cost of over Rs. 10,000 crore.
In the road sector, we need to keep in view the special land and weather conditions of this area. Most of the North East areas get a lot of rainfall and are also prone to natural calamities and land-slides. We thus need to be careful in using appropriate technologies in the construction of roads in this area.
We have recently implemented an improved internet connectivity project for the North East region in collaboration with Bangladesh. This will make available 10 GB of seamless alternate bandwidth for the region. This integration will benefit the North East region tremendously.
The Government is also making a heavy investment in power transmission projects covering all the eight North Eastern states at a cost of around Rs 10,000 crore. This would ensure power to more areas. The recent commissioning of Bishwanath-Chariyali-Agra transmission line has also brought 500 MegaWatt additional capacity to the region.
The railways have undertaken a major expansion in the region at a cost of around Rs 10,000 crore. In November 2014, Arunachal Pradesh and Meghalaya were put up on the rail map. Agartala in Tripura has also been connected with broad gauge line. We are on the way to ensure that all the North East states come on the rail map soon.
In the North East, the Indian Railways has commissioned about 900 kilometres of Broad Gauge in the last two years, leaving only about 50 kilometres Meter Gauge lines to be converted in 2016-17. In addition, a 132 kilometre part of third alternative connectivity route to North East (that is New Maynaguri – Jogighopa) has also been commissioned.
There are a number of strengths of the North East which we need to harness for healthy growth of the region. All the states of the North East region are blessed with natural scenic beauty, distinct historical cultural and ethnic heritage. All this offers tremendous scope for tourism in the region. There is also a great scope for mountaineering, trekking and adventure tourism in the region. If developed and promoted well, this can emerge as the biggest employer in the region. It can also add to the growth and income of the region.
I understand that the Ministry of Tourism has identified a thematic circuit for the North East region. I hope that the North Eastern states will make the best use of the scheme to develop tourist circuits and attract tourists from all over the world. The region can also look into combining a few popular destinations of the neighbouring countries with their tourism circuits. This will be an added attraction for tourists.
The majority of youth of the North East region is English speaking. With improved connectivity and language skills, you may look into setting up of the BPO industry in the region.
The Government has approved North East BPO promotion scheme in the Digital India programme for creation of employment opportunities. The North East States must avail facilities and get these BPOs operationalized in their respective States. This will promote growth and provide jobs to our youth.
The North East is home to exotic fruits, flowers, vegetables, aromatic plants, and herbs. Most of them are organic in origin. If we focus our development strategy on organic farming, it would help the region greatly.
A few months ago, I was in Sikkim and participated in a function to declare Sikkim as the first organic state in the country. Other States can take a lead from Sikkim and the North East Council can also play an important role in the development of organic farming in the region. The North East can become the organic food basket for this country. Organic products are going to be increasingly used widely and if the North East Council can assist the states in the region to take a lead in this area, it will contribute immensely to the income of the people and the region.
There is a large rural population in the North East region. If we talk of Assam alone, 86% of the population lives in rural areas. We have initiated the Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Mission to bring in economic, social and basic development of the rural areas in a cluster model. It should be the endeavour of the region’s states to make use of this mission for the development of the rural areas.
In the end, I would like to express my gratitude to the chairman and all the members of the North Eastern Council for successfully conducting the plenary meeting in Shillong.
My special thanks to the Governor and the Chief Minister of Meghalaya for hosting this meeting. I am sure that the deliberations in this meeting will go a long way in providing direction to the development of the region. Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
23 5 2016, Iran
Trilateral summit of Iran Afghanistan India
Your Excellency Dr. Hassan Rouhani, President of the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Your Excellency Dr. Ashraf Ghani, President of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
Honourable Ministers
Ladies and Gentlemen
A famous poet of Persia, Hafez once said:
रोज़े- हिज्रो-शबे-फ़ुर्क़ते-यार आख़र शुद
ज़दम इन फ़ालो-गुज़श्त अख़्तरो कार आख़र शुद्
[Meaning: Days of separation are over; night of wait is coming to an end; Our friendship will stay forever.]
Today, we are all witnessing creation of history. Not just for the people of our three countries, but for the entire region. To build bonds of connectivity is the most basic of human urges. Today, we seek to fulfil it. We are grateful to Excellency Rouhani for hosting this unique event. Thank you President Ashraf Ghani, for your presence. It truly holds a special significance. It is a privilege to be here. Excellency Rouhani, President Ghani and I have just held detailed discussions on a range of issues. The agenda for economic engagement is a clear priority for us. We stand together in unity of our purpose. To carve out new routes of peace, and prosperity is our common goal. We want to link with the world. But, better connectivity among ourselves is also our priority. It is indeed a new dawn for the region.
Excellencies,
Iran, Afghanistan and India are deeply aware of the richness and reality of our ancient links. Through centuries, art and culture, ideas and knowledge, language and traditions have formed a common bond between us. Even through turmoil of history, our societies never lost touch with each other. Today, we meet to write new chapters in our engagement.
Excellencies, The Agreement on the establishment of a Trilateral Transport and Transit Corridor signed just a while ago can alter the course of history of this region. It is a new foundation of convergence between our three nations. The corridor would spur unhindered flow of commerce throughout the region. Inflow of capital and technology could lead to new industrial infrastructure in Chahbahar. This would include gas based fertilizer plants, petrochemicals, pharmaceuticals and IT. The key arteries of the corridor would pass through the Chahbahar port of Iran. It's very location, on the mouth of Gulf of Oman, is of great strategic significance. Afghanistan will get an assured, effective, and a more friendly route to trade with the rest of the world. The arc of economic benefit from this agreement would extend beyond our three nations. Its reach could extend to the depths of the Central Asian countries. When linked with the International North South Transport Corridor, it would touch South Asia at one end and Europe at another. And, studies show that as compared to the traditional sea routes, it could bring down the cost and time of the cargo trade to Europe by about 50%. Over time, we could even look to connect it with the strong sea and land based routes that India has developed with the Indian Ocean Region and South East Asia.
Excellencies,
The world of 21st century offers unique opportunities.But, it also poses its own set of challenges.Today, the nature of global engagement requires an attitude more suitable to this century, not the mindset of the century gone by. Today, the watch-words of international tiesare trust not suspicion; cooperation not dominance; inclusivity not exclusion. This is also the guiding philosophy and driving spirit of the Chahbahar Agreement. This will be a corridor of peace and prosperity for our peoples. Motives of economic growth, and empowerment would drive it. It will build our security without making others vulnerable. It would break barriers among our nations and encourage new benchmarks of people-to-people contacts. And, help us to eventually build what we all desire and deserve - a friendly and healthy neighbourhood.
Excellencies,
The world around us is changing in fundamental ways. And, the lack of comprehensive connectivity is not the only challenge that limits our national growth. Political turmoil and undercurrents of economic stress continue to spread in West Asia. In the Indo-Pacific,rise a mix of political competition and economic opportunities is putting pressure on the existing Asian order. Global economy is yet to fully come out of uncertainty and weakness. Our present growth and future prosperity is under threat from the spread of radical ideas and physical terror. Amidst this landscape, our three countries are blessed with the most potent resource—our youth. Our three nations are estimated to have more than 60 percent of their population under 30 years of age. They are an asset in our national and regional development. We want them to walk the road to knowledge and skills; industry and enterprise. And, not fall victim to the path of guns and violence. I am confident that economic fruits of the Chahbahar Agreement will expand trade, attract investment, build infrastructure, develop industry and create jobs for our youth. The Agreement will strengthen our ability to stand in mutual support against those whose only motto is to maim and kill the innocents. Its success will be a positive vote for peace and stability in the region.
Excellencies, It is my strong belief that trade and transit routes should only be a starting point of our journey to greater connectivity. In my vision, the full spectrum of connectivity agenda between Iran, Afghanistan and India should span: • from culture to commerce;
• from traditions to technology;
• from Investments to IT;
• from services to strategy; and
• from people to politics.
In a way, it is a pledge to:
• Realize the imperative of better connectivity;
• Establish peace and create stability;
• Build economic prosperity and engineer new trade ties;
• Curb radicalism and remove shadows of terror; and
• Break barriers and spread sweetness of familiarity among our people.
History will look back at this effort with nothing but approval and admiration.
I compliment Excellencies Rouhani and Ghani for their leadership in guiding this effort.
Thank you all. Thank you very much.
#DELIMITER#
23 5 2016, Iran
Cultural Event Iran
Excellency Hadid Adel, the Head of Farhingstan 
Dr Janati, the Minister of Cultural Affairs of Iran, 
Distinguished scholars, 
Ladies and gentlemen
The wise words of Dr. Adel and Dr. Janati before me have set the tone for this Conference. Your conference is most ideally timed. It is an occasion to recall and renew our centuries old association. It is also a perfect response to the those who preach radical thoughts in our societies. It also fulfils a responsibility to familiarize our younger generations with the beauty and riches of our cultural heritage. No one is more qualified to shoulder this task than this gathering of learned men and scholars. I must particularly congratulate Dr. Adel, who has been ahead of the curve in realizing this need. His ongoing project to bring out Encyclopaedia on the Indian sub-continent in Persian would be of great service to researchers and scholars. It is indeed an honour and privilege to be amidst such a galaxy of scholars and thinkers of Iran. 
Friends, 
In the world of today, political pundits talk of strategic convergence. But, India and Iran are two civilizations that celebrate the meeting of our great cultures. The rare Persian manuscript Kalileh-wa-Dimneh, released just now, captures the close historical links between India and Iran. It is remarkable how the simple stories of the Indian classics of Jataka and Panchatantra became the Persian Kalileh-wa-Dimneh. It is a classic example of exchange and travel of cultural ideas between two societies. ­A beautiful demonstration of how our two cultures and countries think alike. A true depiction of the wisdom of our ancient civilizations. For those with the sweet tooth it is शक्कर from India. I cannot help but recall the lines from Hafez, though slightly reversed for the occasion: 
शक्कर-शिकन शवंद हमे बुलबुलाने-अजम 
ज़े ईन क़दे-हिन्दी कि बे-तेहरान मी रसद् 
(Meaning: All the nightingales of Iran get this fresh sweet arriving in Tehran from India) 
Friends, 
Centuries of free exchange of ideas and traditions, poets and craftsmen, art and architecture, culture and commerce have enriched both our civilizations. Our heritage has also been a source of strength and economic growth for our nations. The richness of Persian heritage is an integral part of the fabric of the Indian society. A part of Iranian culture lives in Indian hearts. And, a slice of Indian heritage is woven into the Iranian society. Our ancient heroes and epics bear striking parallels. The dargahs of Azmer Sharif and Hazrat Nizamuddin in India are equally revered in Iran. Mahabharata and Shahnama, Bhima and Rustam, Arjuna and Arsh exhibit similarity in our world views and values. Crafts like Zardozi, Guldozi and Chanderi may be a part of the Iranian society. They are equally common in India too. In the richness of Iranian culture, who can forget the poetry and beauty of its vehicle—the Persian language. In India, we regard it as one of our own. The great medieval poets of India have called the Persian and Sanskrit the two sisters. India's religious epic Ramayana which has seen over a dozen translations in Persian is known to have about 250 words of Persian. It served as a court language in medieval India. But, its popularity is also because it is written on the hearts of the Indians. It is taught in around 40 universities in India. All India Radio has been running the Persian language service for last 75 years. India has a proud collection of almost 5 million manuscripts of Persian in public and private collections. There are more than 20 million documents in Persian in National and State Archives. Many of these have common heritage as they were written by Iranian calligraphers and painted by Indian artists. In Salar Jung museum in Hyderabad, such a combination can be found in many manuscripts. A major effort to digitize all manuscripts, including Persian is currently underway in India. Every year, the President of India has conferred awards on the Persian Scholars. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
As two ancient civilizations, we are known for our ability to be inclusive and welcoming to foreign cultures. Our contacts have not just refined our own cultures. They have also contributed to the growth of moderate and tolerant societies globally. Sufism a rich product of our ancient links, carried its message of true love, tolerance and acceptance to the entire mankind. The spirit of Sufism is also reflected in the Indian concept of ‘Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam’, the World as one family. 
Friends, 
India and Iran have always been partners and friends. Our historical ties may have seen their share of ups and downs. But, throughout our partnership has remained a source of boundless strength for both of us. Time has come for us to regain the past glory of traditional ties and links. Time has come for us to march together. In this endeavour, you, the eminent scholars have a defining role to play. 
It is indeed my great pleasure to inaugurate the Conference "India and Iran, Two Great Civilizations: Retrospect and Prospects." 
In extending my best wishes for the success of your conference, I would also keenly look to receive the ideas that emerge out of your discussions. I am happy to see that ICCR and Farhangistan have worked closely to organize this Conference. Your deliberations indeed provide a body of strength to our literary, academic and people to people ties. 
Let me thank you all once again for inviting me. 
I wish all you and the conference only the very best. 
Shukran, Thank you. 
#DELIMITER#
23 5 2016, Iran
Joint press statement india and iran
Your Excellency President Rouhani,
Friends,
Thank you,
Excellency for your warm and wise words.
I am also grateful to you for the gracious hospitality given to me and my delegation. On behalf of the 1.25 billion Indians, I extend warm greetings to the friendly people of Iran. Through ages, the beauty and richness of the Persian heritage has attracted the world to Iran. For me, visiting Iran, is indeed a great privilege.
Excellency,
India and Iran are not new friends. Our dosti is as old as history. Through centuries, our societies have stayed connected through art and architecture, ideas and traditions, and culture and commerce. As friends and neighbours, we have shared interest in each other’s growth and prosperity, and joys and sorrows. We can never forget that Iran was among the first countries to come forward in support when earthquake struck my state, Gujarat, in 2001. Similarly, India is proud to have stood with the people of Iran during your difficult times. I compliment the leadership of Iran for their far-sighted diplomacy.
Excellency,
We had last met in Ufa in 2015. Your leadership and the clarity of your vision have deeply impressed me. In our meeting today, we focused on the full range of our bilateral engagement. We exchanged views on the emerging regional situation and global issues of common concern. The agenda and scope of our partnership is truly substantial. The outcomes and agreements signed today open a new chapter in our strategic partnership. The welfare of our people is guiding our broad based economic ties. Expanded trade ties, deeper connectivity, including Railways partnerships in oil and gas sector fertilizers education and cultural sphere are driving our overall economic engagement. The bilateral agreement to develop the Chahbahar port and related infrastructure, and availability of about US$ 500 million from India for this purpose, is an important milestone. This major effort would boost economic growth in the region. We are committed to take steps for early implementation of the agreements signed today.
Friends,
Later today we are going to sign the trilateral Transport and Transit Agreement with participation of Iran, India and Afghanistan. It will be a historic occasion. It will open new routes for India, Iran and Afghanistan to connect among themselves. India and Iran also share a crucial stake in peace, stability and prosperity of the region. We also have shared concerns at the spread of forces of instability, radicalism and terror in our region. We have agreed to consult closely and regularly on combating threats of terrorism, radicalism, drug trafficking and cyber crime. We have also agreed to enhance interaction between our defence and security institutions on regional and maritime security.
Friends,
The past history of our ties has been rich. President Rouhani and I would leave no stone unturned to work for its glorious future. Our friendship will be a factor of stability in our region. Later today, I look forward to calling on His eminence the Hon’ble Supreme Leader to advance our ties further.
Excellency Rouhani,
I look forward to welcoming you in India to carry forward the agenda of our engagement Where we are now and where we could be is most beautifully said in a couplet from Ghalib. Let me end with it:
जनूनत गरबे नफ्से-खुद तमाम अस्त
ज़े-काशी पा-बे काशान नीम गाम अस्त
[Means: Once we make up our mind, the distance between Kaashi and Kaashan is only half a step]
I once again sincerely thank you, Excellency for inviting me to Iran.
I also thank you all.
#DELIMITER#
14 4 2016, India
Maritime India Summit
Hon. Governor of Maharashtra;
Hon. Chief Minister of Maharashtra;
His Excellency Mr. Kim Young-Suk, Minister of the Republic of Korea
Our Union Minister for Shipping, Mr. Nitin Gadkari
Other Dignitaries on the dais;
Delegates, Ladies and Gentlemen!
I have great pleasure in being with you and welcoming you at the Maritime India Summit. This is the first time that a global event of such a large scale is being organised by India. I extend a warm welcome to all the esteemed guests attending this event in the maritime hub of India. I am sure, this event; together with the seminars and exhibition, will showcase the emerging trends and opportunities in the maritime sector.
We all know that oceans cover more than seventy percent of the Earth's surface. We also know that oceans contain ninety-seven percent of the Earth's water. Therefore, maritime transport can be the most extensive mode of transport. It is also the most eco-friendly mode of transport. However, there is one more aspect to this fact. Which is that, oceans contain ninety nine percent of the living space on the planet. This means that our lifestyle, transport systems and trading behavior should not spoil the ecology of the oceans. Also, maritime security, freedom of navigation and safety and security of sea lanes is equally important.
The challenges of climate change have shown that even offshore human behavior can change the ecology of glaciers and oceans. This is already causing a lot of concern for island countries and coastal communities in particular. I hope this summit will deliberate on these issues while discussing economic issues related with oceans. The elimination of sea piracy, which was a big threat to international shipping a few years ago, is a good example of how joint efforts by maritime nations can achieve outstanding results.
Friends! There is a reason why this important Summit has been organised today, on the 14th of April 2016. Today is the 125th birth anniversary of a great son of India who also lived and worked in Mumbai. I am referring to Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, who was the architect of our Constitution. He is also the architect of the water and river navigation policy in India. I offer my profound respects to Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar on this auspicious day. I also wish and pray that his wisdom continues to guide us in our efforts towards nation building.
Many of us may not know that Babasaheb created two powerful institutions related to water, navigation and power. They were:  The Central Waterways, Irrigation and Navigation Commission and The Central Technical Power Board. His observations while setting up these two organizations is a testimony to his great foresight.  
I quote from his address on 3rd January, 1945:
“The objects which have led to the setting up of two organizations are to advise on how the water resources can be best utilized and how a project can be made to serve purposes other than irrigation.”
Dr Ambedkar had emphasized the importance of the new waterways policy in order to lay the foundation for a regime of prosperity for the millions of poor of our country. I am happy to state that we have embarked on the development of National Waterways in keeping with Babasaheb’s vision and foresight. With a GDP growth rate of more than seven percent, India is the fastest growing major economy today. The IMF and the World Bank have indicated even better prospects in the days to come. We are taking aggressive steps to ensure that our process of growth is both fast as well as inclusive. This summit is another step to realize Babasaheb’s dream of an economically strong, socially empowered and technologically equipped India.  
I understand that more than 4500 dignitaries and delegates from around forty countries are participating in this Summit. I am particularly happy that the Republic of Korea is the Partner Country for this event. I thank the President of Korea and also the senior Minister, Mr. Kim Young-Suk who is present here.
Friends! We Indians are inheritors of a glorious maritime heritage.  The world’s first dock was built at Lothal in Gujarat around 2500 BC during the Harappan Civilisation. This dock was equipped to berth and service ships. It was built after studying tidal flows.
In addition to Lothal, there were also some other Indian ports, which were major drivers of global maritime trade two thousand years ago. These included:
Barygaza - which today is known as Bharuch in Gujarat;
Muziris which today is known as Kodungallur near Cochin in Kerala;
Korkai which is today’s Tuticorin;
Kaveripattinam which is in Nagapattanam District of Tamil Nadu;
andArikamedu which is in Ariyankuppam District of Puducherry
 
There are many references in ancient Indian literature and in Greek and Roman works about the vibrant maritime trade of India with Rome, Greece, Egypt and Arabia. Ancient and medieval Indian traders maintained links with countries in Southeast and East Asia, Africa, Arabia and Europe. 
Friends! Since my government took over, among other things, we have laid emphasis on building futuristic infrastructure. This includes building next generation infrastructure in many sectors. Port, Shipping and Maritime infrastructure is prominent among them. It is my Government’s endeavour to revive and restore India’s position of eminence in the global maritime sector.
Building upon our glorious maritime tradition, we are working hard to achieve new heights in this area. In the very early days of our Government, we announced the Sagarmala programme. This is aimed at leveraging our long coastline and natural maritime advantages. It also focuses on promoting port led development, energizing the coastal economy and infrastructure development in these areas. We particularly want to modernize our ports and integrate them with Special Economic Zones, Port based Smart Cities, Industrial Parks, Warehouses, Logistics Parks and Transport Corridors.
I must mention that our vast coastline of 7500 kilometers offers a huge investment opportunity. Apart from the length of the coastline, India's maritime potential also lies in its strategic location on all major shipping highways. In addition, we have an expansive and productive hinterland, through which flows a network of mighty rivers. Our maritime agenda will complement this ambitious infrastructure plan for the hinterland which is going on in parallel.
I call upon the global business community to partner with us to give shape to our process of port led development. I am sure, the long coastline of India along with diverse coastal regions and hard working coastal communities can become an engine of growth of India.
To enable the growth of the port and related sectors, we have carried out several reforms and taken a number of new initiatives.
Under our ‘Make in India’ approach, we have taken many steps to make India a global manufacturing hub;
Recently MOODY’s has appreciated the Make in India initiative;
We have done a lot of corrections on the front of Ease of doing business - we have jumped up 12 ranks in World Bank’s ranking;
A lot of simplification has happened in the processes for cross border trade;
We have greatly liberalized the licensing regimes; This also includes the defence sector and ship building therein;
We have taken almost sixty per cent of the defence items out of the licensing process
Most of the FDI sectors are now put on automatic approval route;
Shipyards are being given Infrastructure status; at par with the ports;
Rebate of service tax on coastal shipping has been increased to seventy per cent;
We have granted customs duty and central excise exemption on inputs used in ship building;
A scheme of financial assistance to promote ship building has been approved;  
Customs and central excise duties have been exempted on bunker fuel for Indian flagged container ships;
Tax issues of sea farers have been resolved;
A new company by the name of Indian Port Rail Corporation, has been established to focus on the last mile connectivity to ports.
We have enacted a legislation for declaring one hundred and eleven waterways as National Waterways-1.
We have taken up skill development activities aggressively.
The results of our initial efforts are clearly visible:
FDI inflows have gone up by 44 per cent since this government took over. In fact, the year 2015-16 has seen the highest ever FDI inflow into India;
India’s highest ever quantity of cargo handled by major ports was in 2015;
The port efficiency parameters have shown very good improvement;  
India’s fastest average turnaround time in ports was in 2015;  
In the last two years, our Major Ports have added 165 million tonne capacity with record additions each year; 
94 million tonne capacity was added by these ports in 2015-16 alone which is the highest ever;
The traffic in Major Ports has shown a healthy growth of more than four per cent in the last two years, despite global slowdown;
The performance of the Major Ports in the last two years has been remarkable;
Operating Profit margins which were declining, have increased;
In 2015-16 alone, the operating profit of the twelve Major Ports has increased by nearly 6.7 billion rupees;  
During 2015-16, Kandla Port in Gujarat breached the one hundred million traffic landmark and displayed twenty per cent improvement in efficiency. 
Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust registered a net profit of ten billion rupees helped by a twelve per cent increase in efficiency.
Our flagship companies like the Shipping Corporation, Dredging Corporation and the Cochin Shipyard have registered higher profits as compared to the previous year.
 
However, this is just the beginning. We want to do more. We are enhancing our own capacities of execution and implementation. The National Perspective Plan of the Sagarmala Programme has been released today.  During the last two years, major ports have awarded 56 new Projects involving an investment of more than 250 billion rupees. This will create an additional port capacity of 317 million tonnes per annum.  Our vision is to increase port capacity from 1400 million tonnes to 3000 million tonnes by 2025. We want to mobilize an investment of one lakh crore, or one trillion rupees, in the Port Sector to enable this growth. Five new ports are planned to meet the increasing demand of the Exim trade which will rise in proportion with the fast-growing Indian economy. New ports are also being developed by several coastal States of India.
The multiple measures to promote Coastal Shipping coupled with the anticipated rise in domestic production of coal, is expected to enhance coastal transportation of coal by at least four fold by 2025. We are engaging with our immediate and regional neighbours to promote shipping and maritime security. Recently India has signed a Coastal Shipping Agreement with Bangladesh which will be mutually beneficial. India is also engaged in the development of Chahbahar Port in Iran. A special purpose vehicle by the name India Ports Global Limited has been established to take up Maritime Projects overseas.
I am informed that the Ministry of Shipping is showcasing about 250 projects with investment opportunity in the Maritime Sector. These projects include various infrastructure development opportunities in 12 Major Ports, projects in eight maritime states and other agencies. Of these, over 100 projects have been identified under the Sagarmala Programme. With more than 14,000 kilometers of navigable inland waterways in the country, there is tremendous potential for development in this sector. My Government is committed to integration in infrastructure. We are also committed to creating an enabling environment for investors and to facilitate investments with an open mind.
Friends! All this is being done to benefit the common man. This is being done to provide employment to the youth. This is particularly being done to empower coastal communities. Approximately eighteen percent of India’s population lives in 72 coastal districts. It comprises twelve percent of India’s landmass. Therefore, there is a need for holistic and sustainable development of coastal regions and communities. Development of coastal communities especially fishermen requires an integrated approach. As part of the Sagarmala programme, we will adopt a comprehensive approach with focus on capacity building and training, upgrading of technology and for improving physical and social infrastructure. This will be done in collaboration with the coastal states.
These initiatives will create employment opportunities of approximately ten million jobs over the next ten years. This includes four million direct and six million indirect jobs. To broaden livelihood opportunities further, we are planning to deploy modern and sophisticated fishing vessels. This would enable them to harness resources in India’s Exclusive Economic Zone. In addition, we are also focusing on value addition in fisheries, aquaculture and cold chain development.
The Port Sector in India is a good mix of Private and Public Ports, with both contributing to the growth of the sector. The PPP model of development has been quite successful in this sector and has helped in bringing latest technology and best practices. Private Ports have been growing at a very healthy pace and have nearly doubled their capacity in the last 5 years. They handle around 45 per cent of the total cargo. Most of these Ports are new, with modern facilities and can match the best international Ports in terms of performance and infrastructure.
Friends! India has had a glorious maritime history. We are on the path of shaping an even better maritime future. The maritime sector not only creates and facilitates economic activities; it also connects countries and civilizations. Moreover, it is the cleanest and cheapest carrier of global trade. Investing in maritime sector is not only investing in one’s own future; but in the future of the planet and that of coming generations. However, in this sector, no country can achieve the desired results in isolation. Nations have to collaborate to realize this potential and to overcome challenges in this sector. The objective of this Summit is to provide a platform and forum for such cooperation.
To conclude, I would like to say that:
This is the right time to come to India;
It is even better to come through the sea route;
The Indian ship is well equipped for a long haul;
Don’t miss it;
Missing it means missing a pleasant journey and a great destination.
 
Once you are here, I assure you that I will personally hold your hands to see that your berthing is safe, secure and satisfactory.
Thank You!
#DELIMITER#
12 4 2016, India
Tiger Conservation Conference
Minister for Agriculture & Forests, Royal Government of Bhutan and Chairman, Global Tiger Forum,
Distinguished Ministers from Tiger Range Countries,
Shri Prakash Javadekar, our Minister for Environment, Forest & Climate Change,
Other dignitaries on the dais, delegates from Tiger Range Countries, Ladies and Gentlemen!
I am pleased to welcome you all. The tiger has brought all of us together here. This is an important meeting to discuss the conservation of one of the important endangered species. Your very presence is a testimony to the importance your country attaches to this “umbrella” among species. 
As we all know, the tiger is an apex consumer in the ecological pyramid and food chain. It requires a large amount of prey, supported by good forests. Therefore, by protecting the tiger, we protect the entire ecosystem and the ecological services, which are equally crucial for the well-being of human beings. 
In fact, the benefits from tiger conservation are enormous but intangible. We cannot quantify this in economic terms. Putting a price tag on nature is difficult. Since Mother Nature has bestowed them for its own conservation, it becomes our bounden duty to conserve them. In India, the tiger is much more than just a wild animal. In our mythology, the mother Goddess, who is the embodiment of Mother Nature, is depicted sitting on a tiger. In fact, most of our Gods and Goddesses are associated with some animal, tree or river. In fact sometimes these animals are put on the same pedestal as Gods and Goddesses. No wonder the Tiger is also our national animal. I am sure, other Tiger Range Countries would have some cultural legacy associated with tigers. 
Friends! Species belonging to the animal kingdom, usually do not act to their disadvantage. However, human beings are an exception. Our compulsions and cravings, our needs and greed, have led to shrinkage of natural habitat and destruction of ecosystems. Here, I recall the famous words of Gautam Buddha who said: “the forest is a peculiar organism of unlimited kindness. It affords protection to all beings, offering shade even to the axe-man who destroys it.” 
I appreciate the good efforts made by the Tiger Range Countries in conserving tigers. I compliment you all for this great ongoing effort. I also appreciate the efforts through “Global Tiger Initiative” and the Council. 
I must mention the great effort made by Mr. Vladimir Putin in convening the tiger summit in 2010. The Global Tiger Recovery Programme was an important outcome of these efforts.
I also appreciate the initiatives of Mr. Dorji, the Chairman of the Global Tiger Forum. 
However, from what I have been told it appears that tiger habitats have reduced drastically across Tiger Range Countries. The situation has been aggravated further by the ongoing trafficking in body parts and derivatives of this magnificent animal. In India too, we have been facing the challenge of poaching and disruption in their ecosystems. 
The positive side for us in India is that majority of the population respects trees, animals, forests, rivers and other elements of nature like the sun and the moon. We consider the earth as our mother. Our scriptures encourage us to treat the entire universe as one. वसुधैव कुटुम्बकम and लोकः समस्ताः सुखिनो भवन्तु is our philosophy. We pray for peace and prosperity of everyone - including the ecosystem: ॐ द्यौः शांति, रंतरिक्ष शांति, पृथवी शांति, राप: शांति, रोषधयः शांति, वनस्पतयः शांति  
Friends! Forests are inseparable from wild animals. Both are mutually complementary. Destruction of one leads to destruction of the other. This is an important cause of climate change which is now affecting us adversely in many ways. This is a global phenomenon which all of us are grappling with. As a solution, we have committed to work towards country specific mitigation strategies. 
In my view, for the Tiger Range Countries, a viable tiger population undoubtedly symbolises a mitigation strategy for climate change. This will create a huge carbon sink in the form of tiger bearing forests. Thus, conservation of tiger will go a long way in ensuring a good future for ourselves and our coming generations.
India has a long standing and successful track record of protecting its tigers. We launched “Project Tiger” in 1973. Its coverage has increased considerably from the initial 9 tiger reserves to 49 at present. Tiger conservation is a collective responsibility of the Government of India and States. I also compliment our State governments for their efforts. But the efforts of Government cannot succeed unless they are supported by the people. Our cultural legacy which encourages compassion and co-existence has played an important role in the success of Project Tiger. Due to such collective efforts, there has been a rise of thirty per cent in the number of tigers. It has gone up from 1706 in 2010 to 2226 in 2014.
Our National Tiger Conservation Authority has taken many landmark initiatives. Use of modern technology, including intelligent, infrared and thermal cameras on a 24x7 basis is being promoted for surveillance against poaching in sensitive tiger reserves. Several protocols for smart patrolling and tiger monitoring have been evolved. Radio telemetry is also being promoted to monitor tigers. A national repository of tiger camera trap photo database is also being created. To do all this, we have, this year, doubled our allocation for tiger conservation. We have increased it from Rupees 185 crores to Rupees 380 crores; which is 3.8 billion Rupees. 
I strongly believe that tiger conservation, or conservation of nature, is not a drag on development. Both can happen in a mutually complementary manner. All we need is to re-orient our strategy by factoring in the concerns of the tiger in sectors where tiger conservation is not the goal. This is a difficult task but can be achieved. Our genius lies in “smartly” integrating the tiger and wildlife safeguards in various infrastructures at the landscape level. This essentially takes us to the much needed “smart green infrastructure”, while adopting a landscape approach. The landscape approach would also help us to involve business groups through corporate social responsibility for various initiatives towards tiger conservation. In the Indian context, we intend to achieve this through the Tiger Conservation Plans. 
Considering the ecosystem value of tiger conservation areas, we need to consider them as “natural capital.” Our institutions have done an economic valuation of a few tiger reserves. This study has highlighted the fact that besides conserving the tiger, these reserves also provide a range of economic, social, cultural and spiritual benefits. These are known as ecosystem services. Thus, we need to define conservation as a means to achieve development, rather than considering it to be anti-growth. This calls for factoring in the value of the ecosystem in the economic arithmetic of development and growth. 
Friends! I am confident that we can achieve a framework to foster proactive engagement of industry for conservation. The natural capital denoting the stock of natural ecosystems should be treated at par with capital goods. Our economy needs to be viewed as a subset of a larger economy of natural resources and ecosystem services which sustain us. 
As a country having more than seventy per cent of the global tiger population, India is committed to complement the initiatives of other Tiger Range Countries. We have bilateral arrangements with China, Nepal, Bhutan, Bangladesh. We hope to continue our efforts to address issues of mutual concern for the tiger.
A major threat to the tiger is the demand for its body parts and derivatives. The forest and its wild denizens are an open treasury which cannot be locked up. It is painful to learn about trafficking of body parts and derivatives of tigers and other big cats. We need to collaborate at the highest levels of Government to address this serious issue.
India along with several Tiger Range Countries is a founder member of the Global Tiger Forum, which is headquartered in New Delhi. This is the only inter-governmental organisation of its kind. It is now working closely with the Global Tiger Initiative Council. As a host country, I assure you of our fullest support. We will also be happy to support capacity building of wildlife personnel at the Wildlife Institute of India. 
The Tiger Range Countries are signatories to other international conventions to address international trade on endangered species. In this regard, I want to give you another good news. We are moving towards formally adopting the statute of South Asia Wildlife Enforcement Network. 
At the end, I would like to emphasise that conservation of tigers is not a choice. It is an imperative. I would also like to emphasise that regional co-operation is essential for combating wildlife crime. In this conference, let us resolve to work together to protect the tiger and its space. India is committed to engage with all Tiger Range Countries for this purpose. 
I appreciate your presence and wish this conference all success! 
Thank You!
#DELIMITER#
30 3 2016, Belgium
Joint Press with prime minister charles
Your Excellency Prime Minister Charles Michel, 
Ladies and Gentlemen.
Thank you for your remarks.
Last week has been a sad week for Belgium. Let me say Mr. Prime Minister that we share the depth of sorrow and grief that the people of Belgium have experienced in the last 8 days. My deepest condolences to the families of those who lost their loved ones to the terror strikes in Brussels last week. Having experienced terrorist violence ourselves on countless occasions, we share your pain. Mr. Prime Minister, in this time of crisis, the whole of India stands in full support and solidarity with the Belgian people. I deeply appreciate your welcome and the time that you have devoted to me despite pressing demands on you. As part of our efforts to respond to this common challenge we could resume discussions on a Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty. Negotiations on Extradition Treaty and a Treaty on Exchange of Sentenced Prisoners could be concluded expeditiously .
Friends, 
Our two countries share a long history of friendship. A hundred years ago, more than 130,000 soldiers from India fought in the First World War alongside your countrymen on Belgian soil. More than 9,000 Indian soldiers made the supreme sacrifice. Next year will mark the 70th anniversary of India-Belgium diplomatic ties. To celebrate this important milestone in our friendship, we look forward to welcoming His Majesty King Philippe of Belgium in India next year. We would also be commemorating it with a joint programme of activities in each others’ countries. My conversation with Prime Minister Charles Michel today covered the whole spectrum of our ties. A system of bilateral foreign policy consultations would recommend concrete ways to upgrade our partnership.
Friends,
India is one of the brightest economic opportunities in the world today. Our macroeconomic fundamentals are robust , and at 7% plus, we are one of the fastest growing economies of the world. I believe that a combination of Belgian capacities and India’s economic growth can produce promising opportunities for businesses on both sides. Prime Minister and I have just held a productive interaction with Belgian CEOs and business persons earlier today. I invite the Belgian government and companies to pro-actively associate with India's ambitious development projects including Digital India, Start Up India and Skill India. Belgian businesses can make their global supply chains more cost effective by manufacturing in India. India's goal to modernize infrastructure, especially railways and ports, and building of 100 plus smart cities also presents a unique investment opportunity for the Belgian companies. These partnerships can help us reach new heights in our trade and commercial partnership. I have invited Prime Minister Michel to visit India with Belgian businesses to see first-hand the reality of India's economic and political promise. Clearly, it is not just diamonds that can bring shine to our partnership. Climate change is one of the greatest challenges before mankind. Prime Minister and I have agreed to enhance our cooperation in renewable energy. We would also build partnerships in areas such as harnessing waste for energy, small wind turbines and zero emission buildings. Advancement in S&T and High technology areas is of particular importance for India's development priorities. We welcome Belgium’s collaboration in these areas. Prime Minister Michel and I have just activated , remotely, India’s largest optical telescope. This product of Indo-Belgian collaboration is an inspiring example of what our partnership can achieve. The work is also afoot on other agreements in the areas of Information and Communication Technology, audio-visual production Tourism biotechnology and shipping and ports.
Friends,
In a couple of hours from now, I would meet the E.U. leadership for the 13th India-E.U. Summit. For India, E.U. is one of our strongest strategic partners. Trade, Investment, and technology partnership between India and the E.U. would be one of the focus areas of our discussions. I feel that a progressive path and creative mind-set to India-E.U Trade and Investment Agreement can enable all the European countries, including Belgium, to benefit from India’s strong economic growth. I once again express my sincere gratitude to Prime Minister Charles Michel for his time, welcome and hospitality. I look forward to welcoming him in India.
Thank you. 
#DELIMITER#
27 3 2016, India
Mann ki baat
My Dear Fellow Citizens,
Let me begin by wishing ‘Namaskar’ to all of you. Today, the world over, Christians are observing Easter. I extend my warmest greetings to everybody on the occasion of Easter.
Some of my young friends must be busy with their examinations. Some of them must have gotten over with their examinations by now. For those of you who still have examinations, it must be a testing time with exams on one hand and T-20 Cricket World Cup on the other. I am sure you are eagerly waiting for the match between India and Australia this evening.
Some days ago India won two fine matches against Pakistan and Bangladesh. We are seeing a fine momentum building up in this T-20 Cricket World Cup. Today, as India and Australia get ready to play, I convey my best wishes to both the teams.
With the young comprising 65% of our population, there should be no reason why we should be absent from the world of sports. This won’t do. We need to usher revolutionary changes in sports. We can see that happening in India. As with Cricket, there’s now increasing interest in Football, Hockey, Tennis, and Kabaddi.
You must have come to know that India will be hosting the FIFA Under-17 World Cup next year. Twenty-four teams from all over the world are coming to play in our country. The Indian Football team won the gold medal at the Asian Games in 1951 and 1962, and came fourth in the 1956 Olympics. Unfortunately, over the decades we have slipped from there to the lowest rungs. Today our ranking in FIFA is so low that I feel reluctant even to mention it.
On the other hand, I have been noticing that interest in Football among the youth in India has been rising – be it the English Premier League, Spanish League or the Indian Super League matches. Young Indians take time out to get the latest information on these matches and watch them on television. What I mean to say is, given this rising popular interest in Football and the opportunity of hosting FIFA Under-17 World Cup, shall we just play the role of a host and fulfil our responsibility? Or will we use the opportunity to our advantage to promote sports?
We should create an atmosphere of Football, Football, Football all around for this whole year – in schools, colleges, indeed, all over India. Our youth, the children in our schools, should be drenched in sweat just playing Football. If that happens, we shall have real fun playing the host. So, all of us should make the effort to ensure Football reaches every village, street and alley. Between now and the FIFA Under-17 World Cup in 2017, we should infuse a spirit of enthusiasm in the youth. One advantage of playing the host for this event is that a whole lot of infrastructure will get created with addition of sports facilities. But I personally shall be happy when we are able to link every youth of our country to this game.
Friends, I would like to hear your views on how best to use the 2017 FIFA Under-17 World Cup to our advantage. How should this event be? What kind of programmes should we organise the whole year to help the event gain momentum? How should it be publicised? What improvements do we need to make? How can we increase the interest of our youth in sports through the 2017 FIFA under-17 World Cup? How can we introduce an element of competitiveness in governments, educational institutes and social organisations to associate with the game?
We can see all this happening in relation to cricket; we should now try to bring these elements in relation to other sports disciplines as well. The FIFA event offers us a unique opportunity to do so. Can you send me your suggestions on how best to use that opportunity? I view the FIFA event as a great opportunity to establish India as a brand at a global level. I consider this to be an opportunity to let the world know of India’s youth power – not in the sense of winning or losing a match. In the run-up to and preparation for the 2017 FIFA event, we can harness and display our many strengths; while doing so, we can do image-branding for India as well.
I look forward to your suggestions on the 2017 FIFA Under-17 World Cup which you can send me through NarendraModiApp. Do let me know what should be the logo and the slogans. How should we propagate this throughout India? What should the songs be like? What should be in the souvenirs? Think about it friends. I would like every youth of mine to become an ambassador for the 2017 FIFA Under-17 World Cup. You should robustly participate in this event. It’s a golden chance to build India’s image.
My dear students, you must have thought of travelling to places during your holidays. There are very few people who go abroad; most people visit places within their own states for a week or so. Some people also go outside their states. Last time too, I had requested all of you to upload photographs of the places you visit. And I have noticed that the kind of work which our Department of Tourism, our Department of Culture, State Governments and the Government of India can’t do, that kind of work has been accomplished by millions and millions of Indian tourists. Photos of such magnificent places were uploaded that it was truly a delight to view them.
We have to take this task forward. Do it this time as well. But this time, along with a photo, please write and send a small piece about the place, thus displaying your creative prowess. One gets to learn a lot by visiting new places. Things we can’t learn in a classroom, within our family, from our friends, sometimes we can learn those things by travelling. We get to experience something fresh with each new place we visit – we learn about people, their languages, foods and lifestyles. Someone has rightly said that “A traveller without observation is a bird without wings”. “If you have a desire to truly view, you should also develop an insight.” India is full of diversities. Once you set out to see the country, for the rest of your life you will keep seeing new things and still never get enough of it. I have been fortunate that I had a lot of opportunities to travel. When I was neither Chief Minister nor Prime Minster, and I was young like you, I travelled a lot. Perhaps there isn’t a district in India which I have not visited.
Travel plays a very strong role in shaping our lives. These days the youth of India are being driven by a spirit of adventure and curiosity. Unlike before, they don’t want to go to the same old places or tread the oft beaten track. They want to do something new, see something new. I see this as a good sign. Our youth should be bold. They should be brave. They should have the courage to set foot on places where no one has been before.
In this context, I would like to specially congratulate Coal India. Western Coalfields Limited at Savaner near Nagpur, where there are coal mines, has developed an Eco-friendly Mine-Tourism Circuit. Generally we don’t think of coal mines as places to be visited. When we see pictures of miners, we wonder what it must be like out there. We even have a saying, “Coal blackens your hands”, hence people tend to stay away from coal mines. But Western Coalfields Limited has made these same coal mines a destination for tourism. This is only the beginning, but already nearly 10,000 people have visited this Eco-friendly Mine-tourism site at Savaner near Nagpur. This in itself gives us an opportunity to see something new.
I hope that when you set out on a journey during the coming holidays you can contribute something to cleanliness too. There is greater awareness about cleanliness and people are making an effort to keep tourism destinations litter-free. Both tourists and local residents of these places are contributing to it. Maybe it is not being done in a very scientific way, but it is being done. Can you too, being a tourist, lay stress on cleanliness at tourist destinations? I am confident that our youth will definitely help me in this task.
Tourism is a sector that provides maximum employment. Even the poorest person gets a chance to earn from tourism. When tourists visit a place, even the not-so-well-off among them spend money. Rich tourists are bound to spend more money. There are many employment opportunities created by tourism. India lags far behind in tourism when compared to the world. But if we, 125 crore Indians, decide that we have to give importance to our tourism sector, we can attract the world. We can draw a very large number of tourists to our side. Through this we can provide new employment opportunities to several million young people in India. Be it the government, institutions, society, citizens – we all have to come together to make this happen. Come, let’s make an endeavour in this direction.
My dear young friends, I don’t like it when holidays are just frittered away. You too should think along these lines. Will you let your holidays during the most important years of your life slip away just like that? I will give you something to ponder upon. Can you resolve to add one skill, one special attribute to your personality, during your holidays? If you don’t know how to swim, can you resolve to learn swimming during the holidays? If you don’t know how to cycle, can you resolve to learn cycling during the holidays? Or you could tell yourself, “I type with just two fingers on the keyboard, so shouldn’t I learn proper way of typing?” There are so many skills to develop our personality. Why not learn them? Why not overcome some of our shortcomings? Why not add to our strengths? Do give it a thought.
It is not like you need lots of classes, a great trainer, hefty fees or a big budget for this. You can find something around you. Let’s say you decide to make the ‘best’ out of ‘waste’. Just look for some waste material and start creating something from it. You will enjoy it. By the time evening falls, you will marvel at what you have created from that rubbish. Suppose you are fond of painting and you don’t know how to paint. Just start painting and gradually you will get better at it. You must spend your holidays on building your personality by developing some new talent, acquiring some new skill. There can be countless areas where you could do so; it is not as if these are confined to only the ones that I am spelling out for you. This will help you in carving out your own identity and raising your self-confidence tremendously. Just try it for yourself. When you return to school or college and tell your classmates about what you learned during the holidays, and when your friends find that they have not learned anything new, they will realise that they wasted their time. They will admire you, “You are a very determined man, my friend, you have accomplished something concrete.” This will perhaps become a big thing among friends. I am confident that you will surely do it and, yes, do share with me what you have learned.
This time a lot of suggestions have come for Mann Ki Baat on www.mygov.in: -
Sound Byte- “My name is Abhi Chaturvedi. Namaste dear Prime Minister, you had said during the last summer holidays that even birds feel the summer heat so we should fill a bowl with water and place it in the balcony or the terrace so that the birds can come to have water. I did this and enjoyed it and in this way I made friends with a lot of birds. I request you to repeat this task in Mann Ki Baat. Thank You.”
My dear fellow citizens, I would like to express my gratitude to this little boy Abhi. He called me up and reminded me of what I had said. Frankly, I had forgotten about it. And I did not have it in my mind that I would say something on this topic, but Abhi has reminded me that last year I had asked you to put an earthen bowl filled with water for the birds.
Friends, I want to thank this boy Abhi Chaturvedi. He has reminded me of a good deed by calling me. Last summer I had remembered it and asked you to put water in earthen bowls for the birds during summers. Abhi has told me that he has been doing this for a whole year and many birds have now become his friends. The great Hindi poetess Mahadevi Verma used to love birds. She wrote this in one of her poems, “We shall not let you fly far way, we shall fill the courtyard with grains and fill the tank with sweet and cool water...” Come, let us also do what Mahadevi Ji used to do. I greet Abhi and thank him for reminding me of this very important thing.
Shilpa Kukke from Mysore has raised a very humane issue. She says milkmen, newspaper vendors, postmen come close to our homes. Sometimes utensil hawkers and cloth sellers too pass by our homes. Have we ever offered them some drinking water during the summer days? Have we ever given them water to drink? Shilpa, I am very grateful to you that you have articulated something so sensitive in so simple a manner. It is a small gesture but when the postman comes and we offer him water, he will feel good. Of course, it is a part of our nature in India. But I am glad, Shilpa, that you have observed these things.
My dear farmer brothers and sisters, you must have repeatedly heard the term - Digital India. Some people feel that Digital India is to do with the world of the youth in our cities. No, it’s not like that. You will be happy to learn that a ‘Kisan Suvidha App’ has been launched to serve your interests. If you download this ‘Kisan Suvidha App’ on your mobile phone, you will receive a lot of information related to agriculture and weather at your fingertips. There are many topics on this App, such as what is the state of the market, what is the position of the wholesale market, which crops are doing well these days, which are the appropriate pesticides. Not just this. There is a button on the App which will connect you directly with agricultural scientists and link you with the experts. If you pose a question to them, they will reply to it; they will explain things to you. I hope that my farmer brothers and sisters will download the ‘Kisan Suvidha App’ on their mobile phones. Why don’t you have a look at this gift for you and give it a try to see if something in it is of use to you? If you feel it lacks in anything then you can complain to me also.
My dear farmer brothers and sisters, summer is holiday time for the rest of the people, but for you it is the time to sweat it out even more. A farmer waits for the rains. Before that, he puts in his life and soul to get his field ready so that not even a single drop of rain water goes waste. For farmers, the season just before onset of farming is of utmost importance. We will have to give a thought to what will happen if there’s no water. Can we utilise this time to visit ponds, check the routes through which water flows into these ponds and spot the places where garbage or something else blocks the water from flowing, because of which reservoirs get depleted. Can we not remove the blockage and clean the inlets so that more water gets collected? If we manage to save and collect more water during the first rainfall and fill up our ponds, rivers and streams, then even if the rains fail later, our losses will be reduced. But this can be possible only when we conserve each and every drop of water.
You must have noticed that this time it has been decided to construct five lakh ponds and farm water reservoirs. Under MNREGA also a stress has been given to create assets for water conservation. Every village should save water. How can we save every drop of water during the coming rains? How do we begin an exercise to ensure that every drop of water in the village stays within the village? You should devise a plan and get connected with Government schemes so that we can start a people’s movement which will help us understand the importance of water. Then everyone can join in the campaign for water conservation. There must be many such villages in the country, many progressive farmers and many conscientious citizens who have already done this kind of work. But we still need to do much more in this direction.
My dear farmer brothers and sisters, a few days ago the Government of India had organised a very big Kisan Mela, ‘Farmers’ Fair’. There I saw the modern technology that is now available for farmers and how much change has come in agriculture. But we have to ensure that this technology reaches the fields. Now even the farmers have started saying the use of fertilisers should be curtailed. I welcome this. Excessive use of fertilisers has made our Mother Earth unwell. We are the children of our soil, so how can we watch our Mother Earth suffering? When we add spices and condiments while cooking our food, it adds to the taste. But if we add too much of even the best of the spices and condiments, then would one want to eat that food? The same food would taste so bad, isn’t it? The same thing happens with fertilisers as well.
No matter how good fertilisers may be, if we use them beyond a limit they will become the cause of ruination. There should be a balance in everything. This will reduce your expenses and you will end up saving money. Our stand is clear: Less Cost, More Output. Invest Less and Reap More. We should move forward with this ‘mantra’ and improve our agriculture sector by using scientific methods. I hope we will do, with full concentration, whatever is necessary for water conservation. We have a couple of months till the onset of monsoon. Do remember, the more we save water, the more the farmers will benefit and more lives will be saved.
My dear fellow citizens, the World Health Day is on 7th April. This year the theme of the World Health Day is ‘Beat Diabetes’. I call upon all of you to defeat Diabetes which plays host to so many diseases. Once it enters yours body, a whole lot of undesirable guests in the form of illnesses follow it. It is said that in 2014 India had about six and a half crore Diabetics. Diabetes was found to be the cause of death in three per cent of all deaths. Diabetes is of two types -- Type 1 and Type 2. Type 1 is hereditary; if the parents have it, so shall their child. Type 2 is due to your habits, age and obesity. The world is worried about Diabetes and so it has been chosen as the theme for World Health Day on 7th April.
We all know that our lifestyle is the biggest cause for Diabetes. Physical labour is getting reduced. There is not a trace of sweat; there is just no walking around. Even if we play games, we play them online; very little happens offline. Can we not, drawing inspiration from this year’s World Health Day and its theme, do something to defeat Diabetes in our personal life? If you are interested in Yoga, then do Yoga. Or else, the least you can do is to go for a walk or a run. If every citizen of my country is healthy, then my country will be healthy. Sometimes we are reluctant to get our medical check-up done. When the condition worsens then only does it come to our notice that it is Diabetes to blame. What do you lose in getting a check-up done? Please get this much done at least. Everything is available and a check-up can be done easily. Please do be concerned about this.
On March 24th, the world observed Tuberculosis Day. When I was a child we would be scared by the very mention of the word TB. It would seem death was inevitable for anybody suffering from this dreaded disease. But now we are not scared of it because everybody knows TB is curable and can be easily cured. Paradoxically, when TB was linked to death we used to be duly afraid of it; but now that it is curable, we have become almost careless about it. Compared to the world, we still have a large number of TB patients. If we want to free ourselves and our country from TB, then we need correct treatment, we need complete treatment. If we leave the treatment mid-way, it can create new complications for us. Tuberculosis is one disease that even the neighbours can spot. “Oh look! You have a persistent cough and fever and you have lost weight. Go get it checked. You must have got TB.” This shows TB is one illness that can be detected fast.
My dear fellow citizens, there is a lot of work being done in this direction. There are more than 13,500 Microscopy Centres, more than four lakh DOTS providers, various advanced laboratories. And all these services are free. Please go and get a check-up done. This disease can be got rid of. All one needs is the correct treatment and the treatment must continue till the illness is gone completely. I would like to appeal to you all, whether it is TB or Diabetes, we have to conquer these. We have to eradicate these diseases from India. But this cannot happen with just the efforts of the government or by doctors or medicines till you don’t do something about it. So I call upon all of you today to defeat Diabetes and free ourselves from Tuberculosis.
My dear fellow citizens, a number of important occasions are coming up in April, especially on 14th of April which happens to be the birth anniversary of Baba Saheb Bhimrao Ambedkar. His 125th birth anniversary was celebrated all over the country. The five pilgrimage spots associated with him – Mhow, his birthplace; London, where he was educated, Nagpur, where he had his ‘Deeksha’; 26, Alipur Road, Delhi, where his soul left him for its heavenly abode; and the cremation ground in Mumbai where his last rites were performed. We are making a constant effort to develop these five pilgrimage spots. I am fortunate to get the chance to visit Mhow, the birthplace of our revered Baba Saheb Ambedkar, on 14th April this year. Baba Saheb has given us a lot to help shape us into ideal citizens. We can pay our best homage to him by following the path set by him and becoming good citizens.
In a few days from now, the new year of Vikram Samvat will begin. It is celebrated in different states in different forms. Some call it Nav Samvatsar, some call it Gudi Padva, some Varsh Pratipada, some Ugadi, but it holds importance in nearly all the states of India. My greetings to everybody on this auspicious occasion of New Year.
As you know and I had said it last time also, you can now listen to my Mann Ki Baat in about 20 languages whenever you wish to. You can choose your own convenient time to listen to it. You can listen to it on your own mobile handset. All you have to do is to give a missed call. I am happy to state that although it has been barely a month since this service was launched, 35 lakh people have availed of it. You too can note down the number. 81908-81908. I repeat – 81908-81908. Give a missed call on this number whenever it is convenient for you. Even if you wish to listen to any previous episode of Mann Ki Baat, you can listen to it in the language of your choice. I will be happy to remain connected with you.
My dear fellow citizens, my heartiest best wishes to you all. Many, many thanks.
#DELIMITER#
26 3 2016, Delhi
World islamic sufi conference
Syed Mohammad Ashraf, Founder President, All India Ulama and Mashaik Board 
Shawki Ibrahim Abdel Karim Allam, Grand Mufti of Egypt, 
Shaykh Hashimuddin Al Gailani, from Baghdad 
Syed Minhaj Ur Rehman from Bangladesh 
Diwan Ahmed Masood Chisti from Pakistan 
Syed Nizami from Nizamuddin Dargah and Syed Chisti from Ajmer Sharif 
My ministerial colleagues, 
Scholars and Sufis from India 
Our guests from our neighbours and from nations far beyond, 
Welcome to a land that is a timeless fountain of peace, and an ancient source of traditions and faiths, which has received and nurtured religions from the world. 
Welcome to a people with an abiding belief in Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam, the World is one family. 
A belief in harmony with the message of Holy Quran that mankind were one community, then they differed among themselves, 
A creed echoed in the words of the great Persian Sufi poet Saadi, written in the United Nations, that human beings come from the same source: We are one family. 
Welcome to the ancient city of Delhi - built by the genius of diverse peoples, cultures and faiths. 
Like our nation, the city’s heart has place for every faith, from those with few followers to those with billion believers. 
Its magnificent shrines include the dargahs of great Sufi saints Mehboob-e-Ilahi and Hazrat Bakhtiyar Kaki, that draw people from all faiths and all corners of the world. 
This is an extraordinary event of great importance to the world, at a critical time for humanity. 
At a time when the dark shadow of violence is becoming longer, you are the noor, or the light of hope. 
When young laughter is silenced by guns on the streets, you are the voice that heals. 
In a world that struggles to assemble for peace and justice, this is an assembly of those whose life itself is a message of peace, tolerance and love. 
You have come from different lands and cultures, but you are united by a common faith. 
You speak different languages, but they blend together in a message of harmony. 
And, you represent the rich diversity of the Islamic civilization that stands on the solid bedrock of a great religion.
It is a civilization that reached great heights by the 15th century in science, medicine, literature, art, architecture and commerce. 
It drew on the immense talents of its people and also Islam’s engagement with diverse civilizations – ancient Egypt, Mesopotamia and Africa; the Persian, Central Asian and Caucasian lands; the region of East Asia; and, with Buddhism and Indian philosophy and science. 
As it enriched itself, it also enriched the world. 
It set, once again, an enduring lesson of human history: it is through openness and enquiry, engagement and accommodation, and respect for diversity that humanity advances, nations progress and the world prospers. 
And, this is the message of Sufism, one of the greatest contributions of Islam to this world. 
From its origins in Egypt and West Asia, Sufism travelled to distant lands, holding aloft the banner of faith and the flag of human values, learning from spiritual thoughts of other civilisations, and attracting people with the life and message of its saints. 
In the different settings of Saharan Africa or in Southeast Asia, in Turkey or in Central Asia, in Iran or India, Sufism reflected the universal human desire to go beyond the practice and precepts of religion for a deeper unity with the Almighty. 
And, in that spiritual and mystical enquiry, Sufis experienced the universal message of Almighty: 
That perfection in human life is reflected in the qualities that are dear to God. 
That all are creations of God; and, that if we love God, we must also love all his creations. 
As Hazrat Nizamuddin Auliya said, “Almighty holds dear those who love Him for the sake of human beings, and those who love human beings for the sake of Almighty.” 
This is the message of oneness of humanity, of all of Almighty’s creations. 
For the Sufis, therefore, service to God meant service to humanity. 
In the words of Khwaja Moinuddin Chishti, of all the worships, the worship that pleases the Almighty God the most is the grant of relief to the humble and the oppressed. 
In a beautiful imagery of human values, he said, human beings must have the affection of the Sun, the generosity of the river and the hospitality of the earth, because they benefit us all, without discrimination and distinction among people. 
And, its humanism also upheld the place and status of women in society.
Above all, Sufism is a celebration of diversity and pluralism, expressed in the words of Hazrat Nizamuddin Auliya, that every people has its own path of truth, beliefs and focus of reverence. 
These words reflect the divine message to the Holy Prophet that there is no compulsion in religion; And also that to every people we have appointed ways of worship which they observe. 
And, it is in harmony with the soul of the Bhakti saint’s saying in the Hindu tradition, “Into the bosom of the one great sea, Flow streams that come from hills on every side.” 
And in the wisdom of Bulleh Shah, “Lord is mixed in every heart.” 
These values are the need of our times. 
This is the reality of Nature. We learn this wisdom in the perfect balance and harmony that exists in the vast diversity of a forest. 
Its message is beyond the confines of schools and sects. It’s a spiritual quest that traces its origin from the Holy Prophet and the fundamental values of Islam, which literally means peace. 
And, it reminds us that when we think of the 99 names of Allah, none stand for force and violence, and that the first two names denote compassionate and merciful. Allah is Rahman and Raheem.
Sufism is the voice of peace, co-existence, compassion and equality; a call to universal brotherhood. 
And, just as India became a principal center of Islamic civilization, our nation also emerged as one of the most vibrant hubs of Sufism. 
Sufism became the face of Islam in India, even as it remained deeply rooted in the Holy Quran, and Hadis. 
Sufism blossomed in India’s openness and pluralism. It engaged with her spiritual tradition, and evolved its own Indian ethos. 
And, it helped shape a distinct Islamic heritage of India. 
We see this heritage in the fields of art, architecture and culture that is part of the fabric of our nation and our collective daily lives. 
We see it in the spiritual and intellectual tradition of India. 
It helped strengthen the inclusive culture that is our great nation’s immense contribution to the cultural tapestry of this world. 
In Baba Farid’s poetry or Guru Granth Sahib, we feel the same spiritual connection. 
We see compassion in the langars of Sufi shrines and the village tombs of local Pirs that attracted the poor and hungry; 
The words of Hindavi were spoken in the Sufi Khanqahs. 
Sufism’s contribution to poetry in India is huge. Its impact on the development of Indian music is profound. 
None had a greater impact than the Sufi poet-musician Amir Khusrau. Eight centuries later, his poetry and musical innovation continue to be part of the soul of Hindustani music. No one had spoken of Indian music with such passion as he had. 
Who else could have expressed love for India so beautifully as he did: 
“But India, from head to toe, is a picture of heaven, 
Adam came from the palace of paradise, 
He could only be sent to an orchard of fruits that is India. 
If India is not paradise, how could it be made the abode of the peacock, the bird of paradise?” 
It is this spirit of Sufism, the love for their country and the pride in their nation that define the Muslims in India. 
They reflect the timeless culture of peace, diversity and equality of faith of our land; 
They are steeped in the democratic tradition of India, confident of their place in the country and invested in the future of their nation; 
And, above all, they are shaped by the values of the Islamic heritage of India. It upholds the highest ideals of Islam and has always rejected the forces of terrorism and extremism. 
Now, as they travel to different parts of the world, they are the ambassadors of the values and traditions of our nation. 
As a nation, we stood against colonialism and in our struggle for freedom. 
At the dawn of independence some chose to go away; and, I believe, that it also had to do with the colonial politics of that time. 
The tallest of our leaders, such as Maulana Azad, and important spiritual leaders, such as Maulana Hussain Madani, and millions and millions of ordinary citizens, rejected the idea of division on the basis of religion. 
Now, India is moving forward on the strength of the struggles, the sacrifices, the bravery, the knowledge, the skill, the art and the pride of every member of every faith in our diverse and yet united nation.
Like the strings of sitar that each produces a note, but come together to create a beautiful melody. 
This is the spirit of India. This is the strength of our nation. 
All our people, Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs, Christians, Jains, Buddhists, the micro-minority of Parsis, believers, non-believers, are an integral part of India. 
Just as it once came to India, today Sufism from India has spread across the world. 
But, this tradition that evolved in India belongs to the whole of South Asia. 
That is why I urge others in the region to nurture and revive this glorious heritage of ours. 
When the spiritual love of Sufism, not the violent force of terrorism, flows across the border, this region will be the paradise on earth that Amir Khusrau spoke about. 
Let me paraphrase what I have said before: Terrorism divides and destroys us. 
Indeed, when terrorism and extremism have become the most destructive force of our times, the message of Sufism has global relevance. 
In the centres of conflict in West Asia to calm cities in distant countries, in the remote villages of Africa to the towns in our own region, terrorism is a daily threat. 
Each day brings us terrible news and horrifying images: 
• of schools turned into graveyards of innocence; 
• of prayer gatherings turned into funeral processions, 
• of call to prayer or Azaan drowned by the sound of explosion; 
• of blood on the beach, massacres in malls and smouldering cars on streets; 
• of thriving cities ruined and priceless heritage destroyed; 
• and, of parents bearing coffins, entire communities dislocated, millions displaced, and refugees caught between fire and stormy seas. 
In this digital century of new promise and opportunities, the reach of terror is growing and its toll is rising every year. 
Since the beginning of this century, tens of thousands of families have lost their loved ones in thousands of terrorist incidents globally. 
Last year alone, I am talking about 2015, over 90 countries experienced terrorist attacks. Parents in 100 countries live with the daily pain of their children lost to the battlefields of Syria. 
And, in a globally mobile world, one incident can claim citizens of many nations. 
Every year, we spend over 100 billion dollars on securing the world from terrorism, money that should have been spent on building lives of the poor. 
The impact cannot be fully captured in statistics alone. It is changing the way we live. 
There are forces and groups that are instruments of state policy and design. There are others recruited to the cause in misguided belief. 
There are some who are trained in organized camps. There are those who find their inspiration in the borderless world of cyber space. 
Terrorism uses diverse motivations and causes, none of which can be justified. 
Terrorists distort a religion whose cause they profess to support. 
They kill and destroy more in their own land and among their own people than they do elsewhere. 
And, they are putting entire regions to peril and making the world more insecure and violent. 
The fight against terrorism is not a confrontation against any religion. It cannot be. 
It is a struggle between the values of humanism and the forces of inhumanity. 
It is not a conflict to be fought only through military, intelligence or diplomatic means. 
It is also a battle that must be won through the strength of our values and the real message of religions. 
As I have said before, we must reject any link between terrorism and religion. Those who spread terror in the name of religion are anti-religious. 
And, we must advance the message of Sufism that stands for the principles of Islam and the highest human values. 
This is a task that states, societies, sages, scholars and families must pursue. 
However, to me, the message of Sufism is not just confined to combating terrorism. 
The values of harmony, welfare, compassion and love for human beings are the foundation of a just society.
That is the principle behind my creed of “Sab Ka Saath, Sab Ka Vikaas”. 
And, these values are important to preserve and nurture diversity in our societies. 
Diversity is a basic reality of Nature and source of richness of a society; and, it should not be a cause of discord. 
We need just not constitutional provisions or legal safeguards, but also social values to build an inclusive and peaceful society, in which everyone belongs, secure about his rights and confident of her future. 
This is also a time of great flux and transition in the world. The middle of the last century was an important turning point in history. A new world order emerged. Many new nations were born. 
At the beginning of a new century, we are at yet another point of transformation on a scale rarely seen in human history. 
In many parts of the world, there is uncertainty about the future, and how to deal with it as nations and societies. 
These are precisely the times that the world is most vulnerable to violence and conflicts. 
The global community must be more vigilant than ever before and counter the forces of darkness with the radiant light of human values. 
So, let us remember the teaching of Holy Quran that if anyone slew one innocent person, it would be as if he slew a whole people; if anyone saved one life, it would be as if he saved a whole people. 
Let us be inspired by the message of Hazrat Moinuddin Chishti, 
With your spiritual light, dissolve the clouds of discord and war and spread goodwill, peace, and harmony among the people. 
Let us remember the infinite humanism in Sufi poet Jalaluddin Rumi's words, “Contain all human faces in your own, without any judgment of them.” 
Let us also live the sermon of Bible that calls us to do good, seek peace and pursue it. 
And, oneness in Kabir’s observation that a river and its waves are one. 
And, Guru Nanak Devji’s prayer that Lord, may everyone in the world prosper and be in peace. 
Let us be inspired by Swami Vivekananda’s appeal against divisions and for people of all religions to hold the banner of harmony, not of dispute. 
Let us also reaffirm the enduring message of Ahimsa of Lord Buddha and Mahavira. 
And, from this forum, in this land of Gandhi, 
And, of timeless prayers that always end with invocation of 
Om Shanti; Shanti; Shanti: Peace, Peace, Peace,; Peace within and in the world. 
Let us, therefore, send a message to the world: 
• A melody of harmony and humanity
• The embrace of diversity, the spirit of oneness 
• Of service with compassion and generosity,
• A resolve against terrorism, a rejection of extremism
• And, a determination to advance peace
Let us challenge the forces of violence with the kindness of our love and universal human values. 
and Lastly, Let us restore the light of hope and turn this world into a garden of peace. 
Thank you for being here. Thank you for what you stand for. Thank you for the role you are playing in building a better world. Thank you very much, Thanks a lot.
#DELIMITER#
12 3 2016, India
MOF IMF conference
Madam Lagarde, My Cabinet colleague Shri Jaitley, Ladies and Gentlemen,
I warmly welcome you all to India and to Delhi. Delhi is a city with a rich heritage, and has several historical landmarks. I hope you will have time to see some of them.
I am very happy that the IMF has collaborated with us in organizing this conference. Madam Lagarde, this event is another example of your fondness for India and Asia. I congratulate you on being appointed as Managing Director for a second term. This reflects the confidence the world has in your understanding of the global economy, and your ability to lead this institution. Madam Lagarde, the long pending quota revisions agreed in 2010 have finally come into effect. The quotas of emerging countries will now better reflect their weight in the world economy. This will give them more say in collective decisions in the IMF. You have demonstrated exceptional leadership, in managing the tensions that emerged due to the delay. You played a major role in finally persuading all members to ratify the decisions taken in 2010.
I am sure, the IMF will be able to build on this success. Reform of global institutions has to be an on-going process. It must reflect changes in the global economy, and the rising share of emerging economies. Even now, IMF quotas do not reflect the global economic realities. Change in quotas is not an issue of increasing the ‘power’ of certain countries. It is an issue of fairness and legitimacy. The belief that quotas can be changed, is essential for the fairness of the system. For poor nations to respect the legitimacy of such institutions, they must be able to aspire and to hope. I am, therefore, very happy that the IMF has decided to finalize the next round of quota changes by October 2017.
 
India has always had great faith in multi-lateralism. We believe that as the world becomes more complex, the role of multilateral institutions will increase. Some of you may not be aware that India was represented at the Bretton Woods Conference in 1944, which gave birth to the IMF. India’s delegate was Mr. R.K. Shanmukham Chetty, who later became independent India’s first Finance Minister. Our ties, therefore, are more than seventy years old. We are a Founding Member of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and the New Development Bank. We are confident that these banks will play an important role in the development of Asia. 
The Fund has built up an immense stock of economic expertise. All its members should take advantage of this. All of us need to pursue policies that provide a stable macro economy, enhance growth and further inclusion. The Fund can be of great assistance in this. 
Apart from advice, the IMF can help in building capacity for policy making. I am happy to announce a new partnership with Bangladesh, Bhutan, Maldives, Nepal, Sri Lanka, India and the IMF. We have agreed to set up the South Asia Regional Training and Technical Assistance Centre. The centre will provide training to government and public sector employees. It will enhance their skills and improve the quality of their policy inputs. It will also provide technical assistance to governments and public institutions. 
Let me now turn to the theme of this conference. I will touch on two issues: firstly, “Why Asia?” And secondly, “How India”? Why is Asia so important, and how can India contribute? 
Many knowledgeable people have said that the twenty first century is, and will be, the Asian Century. Three out of every five people in the world live in Asia. Its share in global output and trade is now close to one-third. Its share in global foreign direct investment is about forty percent. It has also been one of the world’s most dynamic regions. Although Asia has slowed down, it is still growing at a rate three times greater than that of the advanced countries. It is, therefore, the ray of hope for global economic recovery. 
When we think about Asia, we must recognize that it is distinct in many ways. 
For example, the theme of this conference is ‘Investing for the Future’. Asian Families tend naturally to save more than people in other parts of the world. Thus they invest for the future. Economists have commented on the savings ethic of Asian countries. Asians tend to save to buy a house, rather than borrow to buy a house. 
Many Asian countries have relied more on developmental financial institutions and banks than on capital markets. This provides an alternative model for the financial sector. 
Social stability built on strong family values is another feature of Asia’s development. Asians tend to leave things behind for the next generation. 
Madam Lagarde, you are one of the world’s top women leaders. You will be interested in another unique feature of Asia which is rarely commented upon: which is, the large number of women leaders. India, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Indonesia, Thailand, Korea, Myanmar, and Philippines: All of these countries have had women as national leaders. Asia has done so to a much greater degree than other continents. Today, four large states of India – West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat and Rajasthan – are headed by democratically elected women. The Speaker of the Lower House of Parliament in India is also a woman. 
India has a special place in Asia. It has historically contributed to Asia in several ways. Buddhism spread to China, Japan, and other parts of South East Asia from India. It has had a lasting influence on the continent’s culture. Kingdoms in the South and West of India have engaged in maritime trade with other parts of Asia for over a thousand years. The Indian national movement showed other Asian countries that freedom from colonial rule could be achieved without violence. It also demonstrated clearly that the sense of nationhood, could be broad and inclusive. It need not be defined by narrow linguistic or religious identities. The Sanskrit saying “Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam” – the world is one family - refers to this sense of the oneness of all identities. 
India has dispelled the myth that democracy and rapid economic growth cannot go together. India’s growth rate of over seven per cent is being achieved in a country that is also a vibrant democracy. It is sometimes assumed that democracy is a colonial gift to India. But historians tell us that India had produced forms of democratic self governance, many centuries ago, when democracy was unknown in many parts of the world. 
India has also shown that a large, diverse country can be managed in a way that can promote economic growth and maintain social stability. One way in which we are doing this is through cooperative and competitive federalism. The states and the Centre come together to pursue common objectives. States which pursue good policies and deliver essential services for the poor, induce others to follow. 
Our rapid economic growth is also very distinct in Asia. We have never tried to gain in trade at the expense of our partners. We do not follow “beggar thy neighbour” macro-economic policies. We have never undervalued our exchange rate. We add to world and Asian demand by running current account deficits. We are therefore good Asian and good global economic citizens, and a source of demand to our trading partners. 
We all want Asia to succeed. I firmly believe that India can contribute to Asian prosperity and development by being economically strong. Amid global problems, I am happy to say that India is a haven of macro-economic stability and a beacon of hope, dynamism and opportunity. Madam Lagarde, you have referred to India as the “bright spot” in the global economy. I view this as a great privilege and, at the same time, a major responsibility. Let me outline our achievements in the last few months and our priorities for the period ahead. 
We have achieved major gains in macro-economic stability. A durable reduction in inflation, steady fiscal consolidation, a comfortable balance of payments position and build-up of foreign exchange reserves are the highlights. 
In a difficult external environment and despite a second successive year of weak rainfall, we have increased our growth rate to 7.6 per cent, the highest among major economies in the world. 
We have improved our economic governance. Corruption and interference in the decisions of banks and regulators are now behind us. 
We undertook a highly successful financial inclusion programme, bringing over two hundred million unbanked people into the banking system within a span of a few months. 
Thanks to our financial inclusion programme, we now have the world’s largest and most successful programme of direct benefit transfers, in cooking gas. We plan to extend it to other sectors such as food, kerosene, and fertilizers. This has improved targeting and the quality of public expenditure. 
We have opened up nearly all sectors of our economy to FDI. 
India achieved the highest ever rank in the World Bank Doing Business indicators in 2015. 
India reached an all-time high in many physical indicators in 2015, including 
the production of coal, electricity, urea, fertilizer and motor vehicles;  cargo handled at major ports and the fastest turnaround time in ports;  award of new highway kilometers;  software export; 
Entrepreneurship is booming, following a series of steps we have taken. India is now fourth in the world in the number of technical start-ups, after USA, Britain and Israel. The Economist magazine has called India the new frontier for E-Commerce. 
We do not intend to rest on these achievements because my agenda of “reform-to-transform” still needs to be finished. Our recent budget provides a roadmap for our future plans and ambitions. Our underlying philosophy is clear: To create the climate for wealth generation and for that wealth to be spread to all Indians, especially the poor, vulnerable, farmers, and disadvantaged communities.
 
We have increased investment in the rural and agriculture sector, because that is where a majority of India still lives. But our help to the farmers is not based on giving hand-outs. We aim to double farmer incomes by:
• increasing irrigation,
• better water management,
• creating rural assets,
• boosting productivity,
• improving marketing,
• reducing margins of middlemen,
• and avoiding income shocks. 
We are introducing reforms in agricultural marketing and have launched a major crop insurance programme. 
In addition to agriculture, we have increased public investment in roads and railways. This will improve the productivity of the economy and the connectivity of our people. Public investment is also essential at a time when private investment remains weak. 
We have also made other reforms that will help create wealth and economic opportunity. Given the enormous entrepreneurial potential in the country, my motto is Start Up India and Stand Up India. The budget has provided a further boost to the ecosystem for start-ups. 
Ensuring employability of the youth is essential for the success of our Make-in-India campaign. The Government of India has an ambitious agenda for skilling our labour force. Skill creation of the magnitude that we have envisaged, involves institution building, which we have undertaken. Now, we have a skill development programme that cuts across twenty-nine sectors and with a nation-wide coverage. 
India is a responsible global citizen in protecting the planet. India played a positive role at the COP 21 Summit. Between now and 2030, we intend to re-write history by growing rapidly and also reducing the emission intensity of our GDP by thirty-three per cent. By then, forty per cent of our installed electric power capacity will be from non-fossil fuel. We will build an additional carbon sink of over 2.5 billion tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent by 2030, by creating additional forest and tree cover. These initiatives are from a country with very low per capita land availability and a low base of per capita emission. We have taken the lead in launching an international solar alliance, involving 121 solar-resource rich countries falling between the Tropic of Cancer and the Tropic of Capricorn. This will help many developing countries, including those in Asia, to take advantage of developments in renewable energy. India has moved from a regime of significant carbon subsidy to one of carbon taxes. India is one of the few countries to have a carbon tax in the form of a cess on coal. The Coal cess has been doubled in the Budget of 2016-17. 
India has a number of cooperative initiatives in Asia. We are transforming the ‘Look East Policy’, into an ‘Act East Policy. Our approach to cooperation is based on flexible geometry. We have integrated in different ways and at different speeds with our neighbours in South Asia, our partners in ASEAN, and our partners in Singapore, Japan, and Korea. We intend to continue doing so. 
My dream is of a Transformed India. I lay this dream alongside our common dream of an Advanced Asia – an Asia where more than half of the global population can live with happiness and fulfillment. Our joint heritage and mutual respect, our common goals and similar policies, can and must create sustainable growth and shared prosperity. 
Once again, I welcome you all to India. I wish the Conference all success. 
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
4 3 2016, India
International conference on rule of law
Hon. Chief Justice of India, 
Other Dignitaries on the dais, 
Judicial minds from India and abroad 
Invitees, Delegates, Ladies and Gentlemen! 
I am delighted to address the International Workshop on Rule of Law and Sustainable Development. I welcome our friends from abroad and thank them for their active participation.
 
This workshop is being organized soon after two important international agreements which happened during 2015. One is the Paris Agreement on climate change. The other is the Agreement on Sustainable Development Goals. Therefore, this conference provides a timely and useful opportunity to discuss the way forward. This is important not only in the national context but also in the global context. I hope you will keep in mind the welfare of mankind and the concerns of the international community in your deliberations. 
The role of rules and laws in achieving sustainable development goals is going to be very important in the days to come. However, rules should be such that they facilitate the achievement of these goals. Unfortunately, some times, the concern for environment is defined narrowly. We all have to realize that if there is conflict, no one’s purpose will be served. I hope that you will show us the way to build and ensure climate justice across the globe based on legal as well as social frameworks. 
Last year, in September, I attended the meeting of the UN General Assembly where the Sustainable Development Goals for 2030 were adopted. These goals reflect our evolving understanding of the social, economic and environmental linkages that define our lives. 
This was followed by the COP-21 where we contributed significantly in shaping the narrative. Our commitments at COP-21 underline the Indian ethos which aims at changing human lifestyle along with changes in the manner in which we engage in economic activity. The problems of environment are largely the effect of our consumptive lifestyles. If we want to make a meaningful impact, we all need to look within; before we read the books of law.
 
Friends! 
I have always felt that anything which is not sustainable cannot be called development. In our culture, development means ‘बहुजन हिताय, बहुजन सुखाय’, ‘सर्वे भवन्तु सुखिनो’ and “लोकाः समस्ताः सुखिनो भवन्तु’. This cannot happen unless the development process is inclusive and sustainable. Anything which compromises on the ability of future generations to meet their requirements cannot be called development. We in India have always believed in sustainability. For us, the law of nature holds great value. If we all observe it, then many man-made laws will not be required. Only the practice of सह जीवन and सह अस्तित्व will be enough to help us. In modern terminology, there is a word called stakeholder. A path becomes sustainable, if all stakeholders are benefitted. However, I must add a word of caution here. The stake should be natural. It should be inherent. It cannot be stretched to include those who may be working with ulterior motives. Nature is pure. Hence, only pure intentions can keep it intact. 
We, in India, have a strong tradition of living in harmony with nature. We worship nature. We worship the sun, the moon, rivers, land, trees, animals, rain, air and fire. These elements of Nature have been given the stature of Gods in our culture. Moreover, in Indian mythology, most of the Gods and Goddesses are associated with an animal and a tree. Thus, respect for Nature is an integral part of our culture, and has been passed across generations. Protection of environment comes naturally to us. This strong tradition has been a guiding principle for all of us. 
There is a well-known Sanskrit saying: 
ॐ सर्वेशां स्वस्तिर्भवतु । सर्वेशां शान्तिर्भवतु । 
सर्वेशां पुर्णंभवतु । सर्वेशां मङ्गलंभवतु ।।
Which means: 
We always pray for welfare, peace, fulfillment and sustainability of all; at all places and for all times. 
This is our commitment; not of today but since time immemorial. If we remember this, follow this and act accordingly, India could provide leadership in sustainable development. For example, the practice of Yoga is aimed at balancing contentment and worldly desires, to lead to a path of moderation and sustainable lifestyle. When I talk of yoga, it is not just its physical dimension. Yoga is very comprehensive. The ideas of YAM, NIYAM, PRATYAHAR teach us discipline, austerity and control. 
Much before the debate on sustainable development began, Mahatma Gandhi, the Father of our Nation, had said that we should act as ‘trustees’ and use natural resources wisely. It is our moral responsibility to ensure that we leave a healthy planet for future generations.
 
Friends! I am sure all of us agree that poverty is the biggest challenge for environment. Therefore, eradication of poverty is one of the fundamental goals of my government. Guided by our core values, we are working towards achieving this goal with sincerity. We want to ensure a conducive environment for 1.25 billion Indians to develop, and prosper. We are encouraging education, skill development, digital connectivity and entrepreneurship to provide an enabling ecosystem for our youth to blossom. We aim to do all this in a sustainable manner. 
We realize that fulfilling the demand for energy is vital to the achievement of our development goals. This is why, one of the first challenges that we took up was generation of 175 Giga watts of renewable energy. We are well on our way to achieving this objective. 
We have also taken up the Swacch Bharat and Clean Ganga Initiatives. I am happy to note that millions of people across the country have joined the cleanliness drive. I take this opportunity to invite the participants to explore as to how we can strengthen this collective endeavour. I am glad to learn that this workshop will also discuss issues related to pollution and waste management. These are issues that need to be addressed proactively. I look forward to your recommendations towards strengthening such initiatives. 
Friends! 
The problems we face in India today are not unique. Other civilizations have also faced similar problems and were able to overcome them. I believe that through our collective efforts we will succeed as well. While doing so, we must ensure that we avoid contradictions between our need to develop and develop sustainably. Our culture teaches us Union between the व्यक्ति and समस्ती. If we become one with the universal order, there are no conflicts of interest. 
Therefore, my Government is treating the challenge of adapting to climate change as an opportunity rather than a problem. We need to adopt the philosophy of योग: कर्मसु कौशलम्. We must do things in a way that causes minimum damage to the environment. This is कौशल or mastery. This is what I mean when I talk of zero defect and zero effect manufacturing. I have written some of my thoughts on this theme in my book, Convenient Action: continuity for change.
 
Friends! The rule of law dictates that no one can be punished for another’s misdeed. We need to recognize that there are many people who are least responsible for the problem of climate change. They are also the people who still wait for access to modern amenities. They face the adverse impact of climate change more than anyone else. This includes cyclones, droughts, floods, heat waves, and rising sea levels. The poor, vulnerable and marginalized groups have fewer resources to cope with climate disasters. Unfortunately, their present and future generations are also burdened by laws and agreements on environment. That is why I talk about Climate Justice. Moreover, the rules, laws, practices and principles of one country cannot be applied to another uniformly. Every country has its own challenges and its own ways of dealing with them. If we apply the same set of rules for all countries and for all people; it will not work. 
Sustainable development is our responsibility. I am confident that we can achieve it, collectively. I am also confident that we can find ways for development which are in harmony with nature. We can find them along the road travelled by our forefathers. I hope the deliberations during this workshop will help in developing a shared understanding of these imperatives. 
I wish this conference a grand success. 
Thank you. 
#DELIMITER#
29 2 2016, India
Remarks on budget
My heartfelt thanks to Finance Minister Sri Arun Jaitley ji for this budget. Our focus is on the villages, poor, farmers, women and the youth. The budget has plans for ambitious schemes to bring in a qualitative change in their lives. 
This budget presents a comprehensive , time bound action plan for poverty alleviation. Several measures have been outlined to double the income of the farmers. Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai Yojana is one of them where a substantial allocation has been made to ensure water to every farm. 
All of us know the importance of power and road infrastructure . There is a vision in this budget to connect every village to road by 2019. Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana has been allocated substantial funds to connect the rural India by roads. Besides there is a clear plan to provide electricity to every village by 2018. 
It will give an impetus to rural economy and bring about positive changes .If you ask a poor man, he will clearly share his dream. Owning a house is his biggest dream. Everyone from a middle class or neo middle class wants to own a house. How are we going to help them realize this dream? This is not possible without the help of the government. That’s why provisions have been made this time to give impetus to the housing sector and ensure a house to general household. 
People who are living in rented house have also got increased rebate in Income Tax over House Rent. Those who are earning up to 5 lakhs will have to pay lesser tax. 
There has been a lot of politics over the poor. You will be amazed to know that if a poor lady who cooks food for her children using a Chulha faces adverse impact on her and her children’s health. Experts say that the smoke of that chulha , is equivalent to the smoke of 400 cigarettes per day. We have to help people below the poverty line and that’s why we have decided to provide free gas connection to such people. 
5 crore families who use chulha for cooking will get freedom from smoke. Poor will get health benefits and environment will protected as well. 
Our government is also taking important decisions in health sector. At times, an ailment can destroy life of a poor family or a middle class family or a neo middle class family. We have presented schemes for senior citizens who are in dire need of help. 
Our country should be safe, our citizens should feel safe and our forces should be equipped with modern defence equipment and our soldiers should get One Rank One Pension post retirement. This budget has made provisions for boosting defence manufacturing and providing the armed forces with modern and potent equipment. 
You might have seen that in infrastructure a provision of more than 2 lakh crore Rupees has been made. This will benefit our forces who are guarding our borders. 
The youth of the country is moving ahead. In order to provide him employment opportunities we are going to come out with two new initiatives, ‘formalizing the informal’ and ‘employing the unemployed.’ 
My Mantra is Start Up India, Stand Up India. To provide a favorable ecosystem for startups, the budget has provided plans in the taxes. Our Dalit and Tribal youth now wants to become an entrepreneur. He doesn’t want to be Job Seeker anymore but a Job Creator. In order to make him realize his dream, the government has decided to establish an entrepreneurial hub. 
The youth of the country should be able to face global challenges and should get opportunities in education . But due to archaic laws and regulations, education has suffered a lot and in order to improve it 10 public and 10 private institutions will be raised to global standards after selection through a challenge route. These institutes will be provided financial aid as well. This is a great initiative in educations sector. Once there will be an environment of competition among higher education institutes, you can imagine what impact will it bring. 
Primary education is equally important. Till now, the governments have been focusing on expansions of primary education which was also important but in order to combat today’s challenges qualitative change is also required with expansion. Children in far flung villages should get education, they should get qualitative education, this is our focus. And this budget presents priorities to such qualitative issues. 
Our government has always stood for having faith in our people.We should not doubt our country’s citizens. Income tax department officials should also have a sense of respect towards our public and that’s why a common citizen should be made free from complicated processes that he faces. Traders and professionals who are facing such problems should be made free from it. A common man who earns livelihood will be free from processes involving presumptive tax payment on turn over. 
Once again, I congratulate Shri Arun Jaitley ji and I assure my countrymen that this budget is a budget of your dreams. This budget has presented the commitment of government towards realizations of your dreams. 
Thanks
#DELIMITER#
28 2 2016, India
Mann ki baat
Fellow citizens, Namaskar.
You might be listening to ‘Mann Ki Baat’ on Radio but you would be occupied with the exams of your children which begins tomorrow. For class 10th   & 12th exams are starting from March 1. I too want to join this journey of yours. I am as much concerned about the exams of your children as you are. If we change our attitude towards exams, probably we will be relieved of anxiety.
In the last edition of  Mann Ki Baat, I had requested you to share your experiences and suggestions on Narendra Modi App. I am glad that thousands of people have shared their views with me. These include teachers, successful students, parents and social thinkers. Two things have touched me especially. First, all those who have written to me, have stuck to the subject. Second, thousands of people shared their views. It is a reflection of how important the issue is. We have restricted exams to school premises, students and parents. Large number of views shared on my App show that student related issues should be discussed continuously across the country.
In this edition of Mann ki Baat, I want to discuss something with students, parents and teachers. I will share whatever I have heard, read and have been told. I will also share my thoughts and I feel. that 25-30 minutes discussion will be very useful for the students appearing in the exams.
My dear student friends, before I say something why not open this edition of ‘Mann ki Baat’ with the   batting maestro, Sachin Tendulkar.  Let’s find out what made him successful. His experience will certainly help you. I want you to listen to the message sent by the pride of Indian youth and Bharat Ratna Shri Sachin Tendulkar:
“Namaskar, This is Sachin Tendulkar. I know exams are going to start in a few days, some of you may be tense. I have ä message for you. Your parents, teachers, family members and friends will expect many things from you. Everybody will ask about your preparations and expected marks. I just want to say you that you set targets for yourself and do not buckle under any pressure. Work hard and set a realistic and achievable target for yourself. When I used to play cricket there were innumerable expectations from me also. Over the past 24 years, many difficult moments came. Some nice moments were there as well. Public expectation was always there and it increased with passage of time. I found a way to deal with it. I decided to set my own targets and to achieve them. If I am setting my own targets and achieving them, then I am doing something good for the country. I always tried to achieve those targets. My focus was on the ball and targets were achieved automatically. Please keep your thoughts positive which will definitely yield positive results. Hence be positive and by God’s grace you can always expect best results. My best wishes for your exams. Write you exams in a tension free manner and come across with flying colours. Good luck.”
Friends, see what advice Sachin Tendulkar has for you. Never get bogged down under the pressure of expectations. You have to build your own future. Set targets for yourself with the free heart, free thinking and free capability. I am sure that Sachin’s advice will help you a lot. And it is true; why waste our time in competing with others? Why not compete with ourselves? Why not to try to break our own earlier records? You will see that nobody will be able to stop you from going forward. You will not expect any praise from anyone when you will break your own record. You will be satisfied internally.
Friends, do not consider exams as a number game. Life should be linked with great purposes. We should pursue our dreams and stay focused. Exams only tell us that whether we are treading on right path or not and with right pace or not. Therefore, if dreams are big, this exam will become enjoyable. Every exam is a step towards achieving that great purpose. Every success will become a key to achieve that great purpose. Therefore, do not limit yourself to what will happen in this year’s exam. Work with a much bigger purpose. Even if you fall short a little, you will not feel disappointed. You will get more courage to achieve that purpose.
People have shared their views on my App. One Mr. Shrey Gupta has emphasized that a healthy mind resides in a healthy body. Students should take care of their health also along with their studies. So that you can write exams in a good health. On this last day, I will not ask you to do exercise or run for 3 or 5 kilometers. But what is your routine, especially during exams, is important. During all 365 days, out routine should be according to our dreams and commitments. I agree with what Shri Prabhakar Reddy has said. He has suggested that students should sleep on time and should do revision after getting up early. Students should reach examination centre before time with admit card and other essential things. Shri Prabhakar Reddy has said this and I may not have said this.  Because I am little unconcerned regarding sleep. My friends also keep telling me that I sleep very less. I will try to do something about it. But I definitely agree with this. Stipulated time to sleep, sound sleep are equally important as your other day-to-day activities. And this is possible. I am fortunate that I sleep less but it is very sound. And it is enough too for me. But I will request you. Some people have a habit of talking on phone for long time before sleeping and those thoughts occupy their mind, so how will they sleep? When I ask you to sleep, I am not asking to sleep only for exams. To write well in exams, I am asking you to sleep tension-free. I am not asking to keep on sleeping. It shouldn’t happen that when you score less and your mother asks the reason, you tell that Modi Ji asked me to sleep and I slept. I hope you will not do that.
In life, discipline is a big reason behind strong foundation of successes. Discipline provides a strong foundation. Unorganized and undisciplined  people, who complete day’s work in evening, think that they have done the job but so much of energy is wasted and there is tension every moment. In our body also, even if one part is paining, the whole body does not feel comfortable. Not only that, our routine also gets disturbed. Any that is why; we should not consider any thing small. You should never compromise on your decisions. Decide and try to do it.
Friends, I have seen two types of students who appear in exams. One is who concentrates on his strengths and learning. Second types of students doubt their abilities and worry too much about their question paper. You would have seen these two types of people. Concern about the paper has a negative impact on results too. The one, who is confident about whatever he has learnt, is able to handle anything that comes up. Someone who can say this better than me is chess champion Shri Vishwanathan Anand. He will share his experiences and tell you how to check-mate in exams:
“Hello, this is Viswanathan Anand. First of all, let me start off by wishing you all the best for your exams. I will next talk a little bit about how I went to my exams and my experiences for that. I found that exams are very much like problems you face later in life. You need to be well rested, get a good night’s sleep, you need to be on a full stomach, you should definitely not be hungry and the most important thing is to stay calm. It is very very similar to a game of Chess. When you play, you don’t know, which pawn will appear, just like in a class you don’t know, which question will appear in an exam. So if you stay calm and you are well nourished and have slept well, then you will find that your brain recalls the right answer at the right moment. So stay calm. It is very important not to put too much pressure on yourself, don’t keep your expectations too high. Just see it as a challenge – do I remember what I was taught during the year, can I solve these problems. At the last minute, just go over the most important things and the things you feel, the topics you feel, you don’t remember very well. You may also recall some incidents with the teacher or the students; while you are writing an exam and this will help you recall a lot of subject matter. If you revise the questions you find difficult, you will find that they are fresh in your head and when you are writing the exam, you will be able to deal with them much better. So stay calm, get a good night’s sleep, don’t be over-confident but don’t be pessimistic either. I have always found that these exams go much better than you fear before. So stay confident and all the very best to you.”
Vishwanathan Anand has really said a very important thing and you would also have seen him playing international matches with good health. He plays with so much concentration and does not even move his eyes. We used to hear about Arjuna, how he used to concentrate on the bird’s eye. Similarly, Vishwanathan Anand’s eyes are fixed on target when he plays and that is expression of the inner peace. It is difficult to say whether we will get inner peace just by someone’s words. But we should strive for that, smilingly. Even during exams, if we smile and laugh, we will start experiencing the inner peace. You can’t have inner peace when you are not talking to friends, walking alone, trying to read so many books at the last moment. Laugh with your friends. Share jokes. You will feel peaceful environment automatically.
I want to share a small thing with you. Just imagine, you are standing at a pond and you are getting a nice view of the water but suddenly if someone throws a stone in it. Now, the nice view which you were getting will not be there anymore. If water is still, no matter how deep are the things they look clear. But if water is not still, then nothing is visible inside. There is a lot inside you, labour of the whole year. But if your mind is not at peace, then you can’t find that treasure. If you have a peaceful mind, then you will be able to use your treasure of knowledge and exam will become very easy.
I want to tell you something about myself. When I go to attend some lecture or in the government also, there are subjects I need to concentrate hard. When I try to understand by concentrating more, then I feel an inner pressure. Then I realize that I need to relax a bit. Then I developed a technique of deep breathing and take 3-5 deep breaths. It takes me around 30,40 or 50 seconds but then my mind becomes calm and ready to understand the matter. This is my experience and may work for you too.
Shri Rajat Aggarwl has written a good thing on my App. He said, we should relax with friends, family for at least half an hour every day. This is a very important thing said by Shri Rajat. Most of the times, when we come back from exam, we start calculating about right and wrong answers. And if parents are educated and more so, if teachers, then they ask the exact answers. They calculate whether you will score 40,80 or 90 marks. Your mind is still entangled in the exam that is already over. You also share with friends about the answers. We get entangled in that only. Friends, please do not do this. Once an exam is over, it’s over. Chat with your family on other subjects, remember old memories. Try to remember the scenes of a location you had visited with your parents. Spend half an hour on this. What Shri Rajat has said is absolutely correct.
Friends, what can I tell you about peace? Today, before you take your exams, one such person has sent you his message, who himself is a teacher. He teaches us the values of life. By interpreting Ram Charit Manas in present context, he teaches us values. He is revered Morari Bapu, He has given some important tips for you. He is a teacher and thinker also therefore his words have combination of both:
 “I am Morari Bapu speaking. My advice to all the students is that at the time of examination you unburden your mind and with a clear, calm and concentrated mind take the exam. And then accept whatever situation comes. My view is that by accepting the situation as it is, we can be more happy and peaceful. Take the exam with a light and calm mind, you will get sure success, you will not feel guilty if you fail and not feel arrogant if you succeed. I end with a couplet ‘It is not necessary everybody get success in this world, learn to live with failures’. I thank our honorable Prime Minister’s programme Mann ki Baat.   I wish all the best.”
 I am grateful to revered Morari Bapu for his inspiring message. Friends, I want to talk about one issue. In their responses, people have invariably mentioned about Yoga.  It is a matter of satisfaction for me that when I meet people from different countries, a mention of Yoga always comes, may be briefly. I feel proud that there is so much curiosity about Yoga. How many people on my mobile app, Shri Atanu Mandal, Sri Kunal Gupta, Shri Shashank Kumar, Shri K G Anand, Shri Abhijeet Kulkarni, innumerable such people have referred to Yoga and Meditation. I do not say that you start practicing Yoga from tomorrow that will be injustice with you, however those who practice it should not stop it, just because of exams. However, it is true that be it student life or latter part of life, Yoga is an important key for the development of conscience. And it is a key which is most accessible and simple. You should definitely think about it. If you search around you and find a Yoga teacher, they can definitely suggest you few things which you can practice in few minutes and will benefit during exams. See if you can. I have great faith in it.
My young friends, you are in a great hurry to enter the examination hall. You want to take your seat quickly. Why do you do this in a hurry? Why should not you manage your time in such a manner that if you are stuck in traffic, still you reach in time for exam. Otherwise, the hurry adds to the tension. You should read the instructions for the question paper very carefully. Sometimes we think it is a waste of time, but it is not the case.  Let it take 2 minutes, 3 minutes, 4 minutes, but read the instructions very carefully. You will clearly know what is to be done and it will ensure that you do everything properly and you will not have to regret later. I have observed that sometimes one comes to know only during exam that there is a new pattern, but if you read instructions carefully, you will be able to cope with it. So please read the instructions very carefully.
Mr. Yash Nagar has written on my app that when he saw the paper for the first time, it appeared very difficult. However in the second look, it appeared easy to him. Questions were the same which he knew, only they were asked differently. It is very essential to understand the question. Sometime when we do not understand the question properly, they appear difficult to us. I emphasize this view of Yash Nagar. Read the question several times and try to match your knowledge with them.You will see that the question will appear easy even before you attempt it.
It is a matter of great happiness to me today that Bharat Ratna and renowned scientist Professor CNR Rao has stressed upon patience. He has given a brief yet very effective message, to all the students. Let us listen to the message of Sri Rao:
“This is C.N.R. Rao from Bangalore. I fully realize that the examinations cause anxiety. That too competitive examination. Do not worry, do your best. That’s what I tell all my young friends. At the same time remember, that there are many opportunities in this country. Decide what you want to do in life and don’t give it up. You will succeed. Do not forget that you are a child of the universe. You have a right to be here like the trees and the mountains. All you need is doggedness, dedication and tenacity. With these qualities you will succeed in all examinations and all other endeavors. I wish you luck in everything you want to do. God Bless.”
See how amazing is the way of expression of a scientist? For which I take half an hour, he took only 3 minutes to communicate. This is the strength of science and a scientific mind.  I am very much thankful to Mr. Rao for inspiring the children of the country. What he has highlighted are the qualities of dedication, determination, diligence. Remain steadfast friends, if you do not give up, fear will run away. For achieving good things, a bright future awaits you.
In my App, Ruchika Dabas has sent a message, sharing her exam experience. She said that in her family, there is a conscious effort to create a positive environment during examinations. Similar efforts were made in her neighboring families too.  And this was emphasized by Mr. Sachin Tendulkar also that Positive approach, positive frame of mind gives rise to positive energy.
Sometimes many things happen, which inspire us. And please don’t think that they help only students. In every phase of life, good examples, given us strength, inspiration and show us the way out of troubles. We all have read about Thomas Alva Edison, the inventor of electric bulb. Have you ever thought how many years he devoted to achieve this feat? How many times he faced failures, how much time was wasted, how much money was spent how much frustration he must have felt, due to repeated failures? But today, the electric bulb is illuminating our lives. That is why it is said that seeds of success are inherent within failures.
Who doesn’t know Srinivas Ramanujam? One of the greatest mathematical minds of the modern world. You must be knowing that he did not have any formal training in mathematics. Still, he made great contribution towards fields of mathematical analogies and number theory. His was a life filled with pain and sorrow; still he made a great contribution to the world.
JK Rowling is a brilliant example of the fact that anybody can achieve success anytime. Harry Potter series is now popular all over the world but it was not the case in the beginning. Imagine, how many difficulties she had to face, how many failures? Rowling herself has said that it the times of crisis she used to focus her entire energy on the job which was most meaningful for her.
Nowadays, exams are not merely for the students, but they are a test of family, teachers and schools as well. However, without the support system of parents and teachers, it is difficult for a student to cope up alone. If students, parents, teachers and even seniors work as a team and proceed in a planned manner, examinations become easier.
Mr. Keshav Vaishnav has written on my App, he has complained that parents must never pressurize their children for more marks. They should merely encourage them to prepare and should be concerned about keeping them relaxed.
Vijay Jindal writes that our own expectations must never be imposed on children. Children must be encouraged as much as possible and they must be helped to maintain their confidence.  Please do not pressurize children. Do not stop him talking to his friends; create a lighter, positive environment. You will see your children grow in confidence. This confidence will be visible to you as well.
Friends, I want to tell it to our young friends. Our lives have significantly changed from the previous generations. We are witnessing every moment, a new innovation, new technology and a new face of science. The best part is we are not merely dazzled by all this; rather we want to move ahead in tandem with the pace of science.
I am highlighting these point because it is the National Science Day today. Every year we celebrate it as the national festival of science. On February 28, 1928, Sir CV Raman has announced his famous discovery, The Raman Effect for which he won the Nobel Prize. Therefore, the country celebrates February 28 as National Science Day. Curiosity is the mother of Science. Every mind should have scientific temper and the quest for science. Each generation will have to emphasize on the innovation. And innovation is not possible without science and technology. On National Science Day, let us resolve to make science and technology as an essential part of our lives. This year, the theme on the National Science Day is “Make in India, Science and Technology Driven Innovations”. I bow to  Sir CV Raman and appeal to all of you to inculcate scientific temper.
Friends, sometimes success comes very late and when the person is successful, his views about the world also changes. You may have been busy preparing for exams and some news events might not have registered in your minds. Still I want to repeat a story which you must have heard recently, that a great discovery has been made in the life of science. Scientists of the world worked relentlessly, several generations of them contributed including our own scientists who discovered the Gravitational Waves. It is a very far reaching achievement in the field of science. The discovery not only proves the theory of Albert Einstein, but also is quantum jump for physics. This is indeed a great achievement for the entire mankind and also a matter of great pride for us since many Indians were involved in this discovery. I want to extend my heartiest congratulations to all these scientist. In future too our scientists will work towards consolidating such gains and in all other international scientific endeavors. We have recently taken an important decision to set up Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory (LIGO) in India. There are only two such laboratories in the world and India will be the third country. The process will gather momentum with the involvement of India. Despite its meager resources, India will definitely be an active partner in the endeavor of great importance for the mankind. I once again congratulate all the scientists.
Fellow citizens, I want you to note down a number. From tomorrow, if you give a missed call to this number, you can listen to my “Mann Ki Baat”, in your regional language. The number is 8190881908. I repeat 8190881908.
Friends, your exams are going to start; I too have to appear in examination tomorrow before 125 crore countrymen. Don’t you remember! Tomorrow is 29th February, Budget Day. Still, you must have noticed by my voice, how calm and confident I am. Let my exam get over tomorrow and yours begin day after. Wish me the success and let all of us come out with flying colors so that our country succeeds. Friends my best wishes to all of you.  Move ahead without the tension of failure or success. Do not give up. Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
25 2 2016, India
Railway Budget
I congratulate Rail Minister Suresh Prabhu, on presenting a thoughtful budget for the dynamic Railways of a progressive nation. 
This budget strives for the dignity of the poor, honour of the women, enthusiasm of the youth and broadening the smile of the middle class. 
This budget presents an optimistic strategy for the future, while giving a complete account of the promises made in the budget of previous year. We have achieved a lot in the past one year and this budget presents an effort to make it further better. 
Cleanliness and upgradation of passenger facilities and technology remains the basic Mantra of last two budgets. Beside this, Railway projects have been defined on the basis of ‘Commissioning’, in place of ‘Completion’. I believe this policy-transformation is a Paradigm-shift in nation’s economy. The special arrangement of the ‘Super-fast trains’ for the poor through launch of Antodaya Express and Deen-Dyalu rail coaches , reiterate the commitment of our government to the poor. 
This budget will have long-term positive impact on the national economy by effective execution, enhanced capital investment and infusion of technology along with IT, in the Railways. 
Appropriate steps has been taken towards fulfilling the Government’s promise to enhance connectivity in the backward areas of the country, especially the North-East. Beside, the chronic problem of our rail routes due to the lack of capacity, has been done away with to a large extent over the past one year. This Rail Budget has further strengthened the measures.. 
We have seen the budgets before Mr. Suresh Prabhu. I don’t want to criticize those, but if I see the Budgets of last five years by the previous Government, the Budget by Suresh Prabhuji has taken a big jump with 2.5 times higher investment. This budget will be an important tool towards the renovation of the nation. The best thing is that the State Governments are also enthusiastically participating in the expansion of our Railways. A detailed road-map in this direction has also been presented. Along with that an effort has been made to seek the co-operation of Passengers and the Railway Employees, as well. Discipline in spending, efficiency in management and accountability to the consumer is the focus of our Government, which is reflected in this budget. 
My congratulations once to the Railways Minister Mr. Suresh Prabhu, Rail Family and the Team Railway. 
Thank You very much.
#DELIMITER#
21 2 2016, India
Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana
Respected senior dignitaries seated on the dais, brothers and sisters, Sai Ram.
Venkaiah Ji has made my job easier; now I don't have to spell the names. He is never worried; sometimes some names are left. You heard the speech of Venkaiah Ji like super fast express.
A short while ago, Raman Singh Ji was describing that Modi ji has started on Sunday which is a holiday. For me it is holiday in real sense. About holiday, I say its holy day. We should do all the work that is possible on that day. When I go to bed at night I would have completed my visit to five states today. I left Delhi, reached Chhattisgarh, then I will go to Odisha. From Odisha I will go to West Bengal and then I will go to Uttar Pradesh.
When 'Janta Janardan' assigns you some responsibility then you should try to complete it whole heartedly. And everyone should try. Today, I had the opportunity to unveil the statue of Sai Baba. The hospital provides free services to the poor, especially for the children's heart surgery. Those who would have gone to Puttaparthi must have seen the big hospital. I would like to point out that less attention was paid to the social works done by Sai Baba while miracles were talked about more. The work he had done in the area of water supply, education and health are indeed very inspiring. Even if we do not talk of any miracle, these works are miracles in themselves. I do not talk of any miracle. Speaking of a miracle in itself is a huge miracle. I salute the great social works of Sai Baba. Today the draft of a new policy was presented before you on innovation and Entrepreneurship. I congratulate Raman Singh and his government for their thinking in this direction. It has a blueprint of what government can do, what government will do, what people should do and what people and government can do together. If we look towards the countries which have progressed in past 50 year then we will find that at the core of their progress lies the innovation. They brought about many new things. They came out with several new ideas which wer later accepted by the world. That innovation became beneficial for the society and became the reason behind economic progress of that country. If there is no innovation, the nation comes to a halt. It causes interruption. The very nature of the life should be ever changing with times. The tradition of innovation should be maintained. We should work for new innovations which are useful to the society and community.
Entrepreneurship, 65 percent of our population is youth. The world is watching this demographic division as a major power. However, if we continue to just recite the rosary of demographic division that our 65 percent population is below 35 years of age, then it is not going to work. This 65 percent of population should be skilled. There should be economic management for displaying skill. The Government policies should be encouraging these small entrepreneurs. Our youth should become job creator from job seeker. He should work with dreams to provide job to other and not to look job for himself. This could be the environment in the country. The scheme formulated by the Government emphasize on all these things. Simply being a graduate and move around looking for job with certificates could not be the life of youths of my country. The environment of my country should be conducive to help realize the dreams of life for my youth. The Government has taken steps one after another in this direction to fulfill their dreams and ambitions.
Skill Development provides skilling opportunities to the youth of the country. 'Mudra Yojna' is financing scheme for new entrepreneurs and even for the old who want to expand. Remember this doesn’t require any guarantee for such people who couldn’t even go to the banks. Money lenders fleeced them. The interest was enormous. Some time he had to flee from his village and at times to leave the world. Mudra scheme has been formulated to save him from the clutches of money lenders. Small people like washer man, hairdresser, pot seller, cloth seller, candle seller or common people when they needed 5-10 thousand rupees, they used to visit money lenders and in a way pledge themselves. Under the scheme, arrangements have been made to provide funds worth Rs.50,000 to 10 lakh without guarantee. So far, 20 million people have been granted funds and almost one million billion rupees has been dispensed to them without seeking any form of guarantee. The idea here is that they expand their businesses and provide employment to poor people. They provide employment to one, two, four people and this is going to create job opportunities. There is prevailing belief in the world that for economic growth the push will come from the private sector and the public sector entities like government PSUs or corporate houses. For a country like India, yet another mode is required which is the personal sector. Private sector has its own relevance, public sector has its own importance but personal sector is the one where each individual becomes an Entrepreneur. The State has come with this policy today to give a fillip to entrepreneurship. He should get finance from 'Mudra Yojna', get skill from Skill Development Program and then an environment of positive market should be created. I'm glad that of out of two billion people who received help, almost 70 percent are from SCs, STs or OBCs. Women Entrepreneurs have also come forward in very large numbers. The force being created and the policies which Chattisgarh government has come up with together shall be of great value. When Central and State Governments power unite, the development comes very rapidly. And I believe that the youth of Chhattisgarh will be benefited.
'Pradhan Mantri Aawas Yojna' is also being launched today. After so many years of independence there are around five billion households who need housing facility. Nearly 20 million are in the cities and 30 million live in the villages. These are the people for whom it is not possible to build a house on their own. Neither do they have land nor the money. Systems sometime play a big role for development. Poorest of the poor find a way of living. He lives in the slums, goes out in the day time and comes back in night to sleep. There is no environment for the family nor he has the dreams. But if he is given a small house, he is willing to pay back. If government and banks extend help, this model of public private partnership can move forward.
Once he has the house, second thing comes to his mind. If guests come, there should be something at the entrance to wipe the feet. Then he saves 10 rupees and gets a doormat. The he thinks it was okay in slum but now when people come here, there should be carpet. He then saves some money and purchases the carpet next month. After sometime he thinks his children should study. Then he starts thinking for their education.
Once the roof over the head comes, the walls come there, it breathes in a new life to his dreams and he starts doing new things.
Hence I would like to point out that the 'Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana' is not an Infrastructure. It is not meant to create walls or to provide land. It is a big program to fulfill the dreams and aspirations of the people. Even for the poorest of the poor in India and every individual, there is a desire to have his own house. However, the desires of the poor are never fulfilled. No poor wants to give poverty to their children in inheritance. He also wants to give them something. Government has a dream for such people to help them fulfill their dreams.
It will be 75 years of India's independence in 2022. Can every citizen of country, all the governments, all those who are thinkers in public or personal life, all of them should resolve that in 2022 when it will be 75 years of India's independence how can we give back to all those great men who laid down their lives for independence, spent their young days in jail, were hanged, sacrificed themselves and help us attain independence. This should be resolve of every citizen of the country. We should think what kind should be the nation of our dreams. We should have a dream that on 75 years of independence, even the poorest of the poor of India should have a house of their own.
It is quite a task since 50 million households are to be created by 2022. Lots of human resources will be required. But it will also increase the employment opportunities. Cement, iron, brick, clay all will be sold more. There will be more work for the workers. We will be a witness to a major economic trend in coming days for the young generation. Life is going to change and that program starts here. States governments across the country need to act fast and decide what would be the location of the land to build such housing units. Center is ready to pursue this work. State and Central Government will do this work together and provide shelter to poorest of poor of this country. His dreams will get a new life with this shelter. And with those dreams the country will scale new heights in 2022. With this belief I once again convey my greetings to Raman Singh Ji and his team. Sriman Venkaiah ji is the Minister of this Department and is working day and night. I believe that this dream shall come true.
#DELIMITER#
13 2 2016, India
Make In India
His Excellency, the Prime Minister of Sweden; 
His Excellency, the Prime Minister of Finland; 
His Excellency, the First Deputy Prime Minister of Poland; 
Ministers, Excellencies and Dignitaries from other countries; 
Governor of Maharashtra; 
Chief Minister of Maharashtra; 
Minister of State for Commerce and Industry; 
Invitees, Industry Leaders, Ladies and Gentlemen! 
I am delighted to be part of the celebrations of the “Make in India Week.” I welcome you all to Mumbai, the commercial capital of India. I particularly welcome our friends from abroad and thank them for their active participation. I thank the Government of Maharashtra for hosting this event. I also thank other States for their active participation. 
Friends! 
When I look back at the launch of the Make in India initiative over a year ago, I also recall the aspirations of our youth. 65 per cent of the population of India is under the age of 35. This youthful energy is our greatest strength. 
We launched the Make in India campaign to create employment and self-employment opportunities for our youth. We are working aggressively towards making India a Global Manufacturing Hub. We want the share of manufacturing in our GDP to go up to 25 per cent in the near future. 
We were also aware that under the pressure of this campaign, the government machinery will be required to make a number of corrections on the policy front. 
We are committed to make India an easy place to do business. 
We want to present to the world the enormous opportunities that India offers as a base for manufacturing, design, research and development. 
Make in India week is an opportunity to take stock of how we have performed. And what could be the road ahead. 
This event will show-case different aspects of the progress that we have made. This is the biggest multi-sectoral event and exhibition ever held in India. I encourage all of you to see for yourselves the direction that India is taking. 
Let me take this opportunity to share my thoughts. 
In a year’s time, Make in India has become the biggest brand that India has ever created. Both within and outside the country, it has captured the imagination of people, institutions, industries, media and the political leadership. 
This is because: 
It reflects our collective desire to engage in productive activities; 
• It also reflects the global need to produce things at lower cost. 
• It is forcing us to make corrections and increase efficiency; 
• It has emboldened us to integrate with the world on equal terms. 
• Let me give you some concrete examples of what we have done: 
Today, India is perhaps the most open country for FDI. Most of the FDI sectors have been put on automatic approval route. 
Our FDI inflows have gone up by 48 per cent since the day my Government came into office. In fact, FDI inflow in December, 2015 was the highest ever in this country. This is, at a time, when global FDI has fallen substantially. 
We have carried out a number of corrections on the taxation front. We have said that we will not resort to retrospective taxation. And I repeat this commitment once again. We are also swiftly working towards making our tax regime transparent, stable and predictable. 
We have laid all round emphasis on Ease of Doing Business. In the manufacturing sector, we have taken decisive steps to simplify processes and rationalize provisions. This includes licensing, cross-border trade, security and environmental clearances. We have announced attractive schemes in several sectors including electronics and textiles. 
We have made substantial policy corrections in the defence sector. From licensing to offset regime and export regime, we have given what the defence industry was looking for. 
Smooth and transparent allocation of natural resources is another example. The advantages from this are two-fold: On one hand the production of such resources has gone up. On the other hand, the transparent regime that we have established provides a level playing field among users and stake-holders. 
This year, we will record the highest ever coal production. Also, 2015 was the year when India’s highest ever generation of electricity was recorded. 
On the issue of safety of properties and rights, we have already enacted a law for fast tracking of arbitration proceedings. We are establishing dedicated Commercial Courts and Commercial Divisions in High Courts. The formation of the Company Law Tribunal is at the final stage. 
Soon we shall be putting in place an effective IPR Policy and patent regime. We hope to pass the bankruptcy law which has been tabled in Parliament. 
Hence, on the front of policy and procedure, we have made our systems cleaner, simpler, pro-active and business friendly. 
I believe in Minimum Government and Maximum Governance. Therefore, almost on a daily basis, we are trying to remove the bottlenecks that were affecting investments and growth. 
It is good to see that changes and corrections are taking place not just at the level of the Federal Government but also at the state level. States are now in healthy competition to provide ease of business and infrastructure linkages.
The results have been encouraging.
India has become the fastest growing large economy in the world. We will end this fiscal year with well over seven per cent growth in GDP. IMF, World Bank, OECD, ADB and other institutions have projected even better growth in the coming days. 
In 2014-15, India contributed 12.5 per cent of global growth. Its contribution to global growth is 68 per cent higher than its share of the world economy. 
Let me also mention some other indicators: 
India has consistently been ranked as the most attractive investment destination by several global agencies and institutions. 
• We have jumped twelve ranks in the latest global ranking by the World Bank on ease of doing business. 
• India has improved its UNCTAD ranking of investment attractiveness, from fifteenth, to ninth. 
• India has jumped sixteen places on the World Economic Forum’s global competitive index. 
• Moody’s has upgraded the rating of India as positive. 
• The momentum of the Make in India campaign has given us confidence. It motivates us to make our policies and processes easier and friendlier. 
With this background, I invite and encourage you to make India your work place; and also your home.
Friends! 
We are particularly keen to scale up investments in next generation infrastructure. This includes roads, ports, railways, airports, telecom, digital networks and clean energy. 
We are also investing in our social, industrial and agricultural infrastructure to give better income and quality of life to our people. 
So far, it was our implementation capacity that was the biggest bottleneck. We have speeded up processes. The result is faster turn-around of projects. India’s highest ever kilometers of new highway contracts awarded was in 2015. 
Similarly, the increase in railway capital expenditure was the highest this year. 
Thus, whether it is physical or social infrastructure; we are executing it much more efficiently than ever before. 
Another bottleneck was financing. To enhance financing, we are trying innovative ways. We are opening up our Greenfield and Brownfield projects for Public Private Partnership. With strong fiscal discipline, and by plugging leakages, we are trying to provide more resources for infrastructure. 
We have also set up the National Investment and Infrastructure Fund. We have come up with the mechanism of Tax Free Infrastructure Bonds for projects in rail, road and irrigation sectors. We are working with a number of countries, financial markets and funds on these financial instruments. 
Ladies and Gentlemen! 
India is a land of immense opportunities. Fifty of our cities are ready for setting up Metro Rail Systems. We have to build fifty million houses. The requirement of road, rail and waterways is enormous. There is no time for incremental changes. We want a quantum jump. 
We have also decided to do this in a cleaner and greener way. That is why, we have made a commitment to the world community at the recent COP-21 meeting in Paris. Hence, we are going for renewable energy in a big way - 175 Gigawatts. 
I lay great stress on zero defect and zero effect manufacturing. We place high emphasis on energy efficiency, water re-cycling, waste to energy, clean India and river cleaning. These initiatives are directed at improving quality of life in cities and villages. These initiatives provide you additional avenues for investment in technologies, services and human resources. 
Friends! 
India is blessed with three Ds. These are: Democracy, Demography and Demand. To this, we have added the fourth D that is Deregulation. Today’s India is this four dimensional India. 
Our judicial systems are independent and time tested. 
You will not find all these elements in any other country. 
With these strengths, India offers you a solid platform to test and launch your making and designing capabilities. In addition, our maritime location makes it easy to market products in several other continents. 
We are trying to further enable and harness this vast potential with path-breaking initiatives. Campaigns like Digital India and Skill India have been designed to prepare people to take part in this process. We have launched financing schemes which are dedicated to promote entrepreneurship. We are giving loans through MUDRA Bank without any collateral. I have also impressed upon the Banks to particularly finance young entrepreneurs belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Tribes as well as women entrepreneurs. 
Only this will realize the dreams of Mahatma Gandhi who wanted industries to be run in Villages and Cottages. 
• Only this will realize the dreams of Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar who advocated the need to move surplus labour from agriculture to other occupations. 
• We are soon going to strengthen this process further under the banner of Stand-up India. 
I feel that today, our domestic industry and investors are feeling much more confident and optimistic in spite of an uncertain global situation. 
When we started the Make in India campaign, manufacturing growth in the country was 1.7 per cent. This year it has improved substantially. In the current quarter, manufacturing growth is expected be around 12.6 per cent. 
The composite PMI output index has climbed to an eleven month high of 53.3 per cent in January 2016. 
• The total number of investment proposals during the last eight months is higher by 27 per cent. 
• We have recorded the highest ever production of motor vehicles in 2015. 
• As many as fifty new mobile phone factories were set up in the country during past ten months. 
• Electronic manufacturing has grown six-fold to 18 million. 
• 159 Electronic System Design and Manufacturing units, popularly known as ESDM units were established in India in 2015. 
• As per estimates of certain agencies, the Indian job market is now on a strong footing. For example, the Monster Employment Index for India stood at 229 in January 2016 which is up by 52 per cent over January of last year. 
• Similarly, on the trade front: 
India’s highest ever software exports were recorded in 2015. 
• Also in 2015, our major ports handled the highest ever quantity of cargo. 
• These are very good signs. I would like to give our industry some friendly advice. Don’t wait. Don’t Relax. There are immense opportunities in India. You should take advantage of the renewed interest of Global Players to work in India. Many of them are looking for technological and financial collaborations with Indian partners. This includes high-tech sectors and high-value areas like defence production. I assure you that if you take one step; we will walk two steps for you. 
In a competitive world improving managerial and technological capacity is essential for survival and growth. From space shuttles to pollution control; from health to education; from agriculture to services; our young entrepreneurs and start-ups are showing us newer and faster ways for enterprise and delivery. My Government is committed to support them and tap their energy fully. We want our youth to become job creators rather than job seekers. That is why, we have launched the Start up India Campaign. 
We are keen to find ways in which: 
Our minds are able to empower the hands; 
• Our hands are able to master the machines; 
• Our machines are able to make the best; 
• Our products are able to beat the rest. 
• Make in India is a drive to fulfill unmet demands of the common man. It is also an effort to engage and empower the unemployed. I also emphasize on Make for India; so that human and sectoral needs can be fulfilled. I have heard several global companies talk about their localization plans. Thus, this campaign has the capacity to boost the Indian economy and also brighten the global scenario. 
Friends! 
I have been saying that this century is Asia’s century. My advice to you is to Make India your center; if you want this century to be your century. I invite everyone sitting here and also those not here, to be a part of India’s unfolding story. 
This is the best time ever to be in India; 
And it is even better to Make in India. 
Thank You ! 
#DELIMITER#
7 2 2016, India
International fleet review, Vishakhapatnam
Honourable Governor of Andhra Pradesh and Chief Ministers 
My Cabinet colleagues; 
Delegates of Foreign Navies; 
Brave and proud men and women of the Indian Navy; and 
The resolute people of this great city- Visakhapatnam.
I am privileged to visit Visakhapatnam. The city has a special place in the heart of all Indians. 
My last visit to Vishakhapatnam was in October of 2014. 
At that time, Cyclone Hudhud had left the city shattered in pieces. 
But, the people of Vishakhapatnam smiled in the face of adversity. 
It is a tribute to the city that within 14 months, you have risen against all odds to welcome the Navies from across the continents in this International Fleet Review. 
A little over a year ago, we saw the full fury of the ocean. Today, thanks to the spirit of the people of Visakhapatnam, we are discussing how the oceans can be a source of economic prosperity for all of us. 
For its courage and resolve, we all salute the city of Visakhapatnam. 
My profuse thanks to the men and women of the Indian Navy for their tireless dedication for making this Fleet Review a truly historic success. 
My sincere gratitude also to Chief Minister Chandrababu Naiduji for his strong support for this international event. 
For me personally, witnessing the harmony among the best of International Navies here has been a rewarding experience. 
Just over three months earlier in October, we welcomed in Delhi, for the first time ever, all the 54 African nations, including over 40 Heads of State for the 3rd India-Africa Summit. 
A few weeks earlier in August 2015, India had hosted in Jaipur 14 Heads of the State for the Second Forum for India-Pacific Island Cooperation. 
Just day before yesterday, we welcomed all the SAARC countries for the 12th South Asian Games in Guwahati. 
And today it is our pleasure to welcome 50 foreign Navies from every corner of the globe at India's second International Fleet review- the first one on India's East Coast. 
Your participation is a message of cooperation and friendship that we deeply cherish. 
On behalf of my countrymen, I thank you all for accepting our invitation and joining in this event with such spirit.
To build on the gains from today's gathering, India would host the first ever Global Maritime Summit in April this year. 
Its priority would be to scale up and strengthen the vibrant trade / investment / technology and commercial linkages between India and other maritime nations. 
Friends, 
The oceans and world’s waterways are global commons. Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam– the concept of whole world as a family – is perhaps most vividly witnessed on the oceans of the planet, that connect us all. 
The last time India hosted the International Fleet Review was in the year 2001, in the city of Mumbai. 
The world of 2016 is vastly different. 
Its politics is turbulent, and its challenges complex. 
At the same time, the oceans are the lifelines of global prosperity. They present us with great economic opportunities to build our nations. 
Over 90% of global merchandise trade is carried on the oceans. 
Over the last 15 years, its value has grown from about 6 trillion dollars to about 20 trillion dollars. 
Oceans are critical for the global energy security as over 60% of world’s oil production moves through sea routes. 
Our ability to reap economic benefits from the oceans rests on our capacity to respond to the challenges in the maritime domain. 
The threat of sea borne terror, of which India has been a direct victim, continues to endanger the regional and global peace and stability. 
Piracy too remains a strong challenge. 
The threat of natural disasters like tsunamis and cyclones is ever present. 
Manmade problems such as oil spills, climate change continue to risk the stability of the maritime domain. 
A peaceful and stable maritime environment is, therefore, critical for the regional and global security. It is also a must to harvest the riches of the oceanic ecosystems. 
Given the scale and complexity of modern day challenges, the international maritime stability cannot be the preserve of a single nation. 
It has to be a shared goal and responsibility of all the seafaring countries.
To this end, the Navies and maritime agencies of the world need to work together, and engineer virtuous cycles of cooperation. 
But, where necessary, they also need to act to secure the international sea lanes of communication. 
I believe that if oceans were to propel our economies, then we must: 
• Use seas to build peace, friendship and trust, and curb conflict; 
• respect and ensure freedom of navigation; and
• cooperate, not compete in responding to the challenges in the seas. 
The large presence of foreign Navies at this Fleet Review is a confirmation of our shared urge to walk the pathways of peace and cooperation to keep the maritime domain safe and secure. 
Friends, 
India is, and has always been, a maritime nation. 
India's ancient Sanskrit texts also refer to the oceans as the storehouse of Chaturdashanam Ratnanam, the 14 gems. 
Surrounded by sea from three sides, India has a long coastline of over 7500 kilometres. 
We have been blessed with a rich maritime heritage ever since .Lothal in Gujarat became one of the earliest sea ports of the world. 
India’s central location in the Indian Ocean has connected us with other cultures, shaped our maritime trade routes, influenced India’s strategic thought, and defined our maritime character. 
Since the days of the Indus Valley Civilization, India has maintained an extensive network of maritime links, including with Africa, Western Asia, the Mediterranean region, the West, South East Asia and the Far East. 
We are delighted that the Navies from all these regions have joined in this Fleet Review. 
The Photo Essay book on the ‘Maritime Heritage of India’, that I have just released, showcases this glorious maritime tradition.
Friends, 
In moderntimes too, the oceans, especially the Indian Ocean, occupy a vital place in India’s national security and economic prosperity.The waters of the Indian Ocean touch the shores of over 40 countries. 
About half of world's container traffic; and close to one-third of world's cargo traffic passes through this region. 
90% of our trade by volume and 90% of our oil imports are carried on the seas. 
India’s 1200 island territories, and our huge Exclusive Economic Zone of 2.4 million square kilometers makes clear the economic significance of the Indian Ocean. 
For us, it also serves as a strategic bridge with the nations in our immediate and extended maritime neighbourhood. 
In March last year, in Mauritius,I had spelt out our vision for the Indian Ocean. 
The Indian Ocean Region is one of my foremost policy priorities. Our approach is evident in our vision of “Sagar”, which means “Ocean” and stands for – Security And Growth for All in the Region. 
We would continue to actively pursue and promote our geo-political, strategic and economic interests on the seas, in particular the Indian Ocean. 
To this end, India's modern and multi-dimensional Navy leads from the front. It is a force for peace and good. 
A network of growing political and economic maritime partnerships, and strengthening of regional frameworksalso helps us pursue our goals. 
Friends,
India’s quest for economic prosperity through oceans is a part of our larger efforts to transform India. 
We are not just a bright spot in the global economy. Regionally and internationally, we are a pillar of stability and an important growth centre. 
India's rise is in harmony with the goal of maintaining the regional and global peace and security. 
Within the country, there is great optimism, enthusiasm and a “can do” mindset. 
This optimism comes from the energy and enterprise of our confident youth. 
It also comes from our bold and sustained measures to transform our country, improve our laws, processes and institutions. 
We are launching new initiatives and creating opportunities to empower people, and give them a sense of ownership in nation's progress.
“Make in India”
Defence manufacturing and ship building are among its focus areas. 
In a week from now, on 13 February, we would hold 7 days of global engagement under "Make in India" in Mumbai. 
During this time, the best in the global industry would link up with the innovation, design and manufacturing opportunities of India- the world's fastest growing economy. 
We want to invite the world to Make in India, Make for India, and Make for the World. 
We take pride in the fact that of all the Indian Naval ships participating in this Fleet Review, at least 37 are “Made in India” – a number that will surely rise in the coming years. 
Our “Skill India” program is building institutions that train, support, encourage and guide our 800 million youth on the path of entrepreneurship. 
Our skilled youth are ready to respond to the national and global manpower demands of the 21st century. 
An important part of India’s transformation is my vision of “Blue Economy”
The Blue Chakra – or the wheel – in our National Flag, represents the potential of the Blue Economy. 
An essential part of this pursuit is the development of India's coastal and island territories: but, not just for tourism. 
We want to build new pillars of economic activity in the coastal areas and in linked hinterlands through sustainable tapping of oceanic resources. 
Strengthening our marine research, development of eco-friendly, marine industrial and technology base, and fisheries are other elements of our goal. 
In this endeavour, I see youth in the coastal areas as our true assets. They have a natural and deep understanding of the Oceans. 
They could lead the way in the development of blue economy in India. 
In partnership with all the coastal states of India, I want to shape a special program of skilling India's youth in the coastal areas of the country. 
Friends, 
In the end, let me once again congratulate the Indian Navy for the flawless conduct of this grand event. 
For the homeward journey of all our Naval friends from across the world, may you always have fair winds, following seas, and many a fathom below your keel. 
Thank You. 
Jai Hind!
#DELIMITER#
5 2 2016, India
South Asian games
I feel privileged and honoured to be among sportspersons from our neighbourhood and brothers and sisters from SAARC countries. I welcome all of you to India, a country known for its culture of अतिथि देवो भव: and to this beautiful city of Guwahati known for its hospitality and love for sports. 
What moves me today, is your electrifying presence, full of excitement and enthusiasm for this important international sports event on the banks of the mighty Brahmaputra.
Guwahati has come a long way since the days of Pragjyotishpur in Ancient India. It is now a modern and vibrant city and a hub of all economic activities in the North-Eastern Region of India. 
Young people in the North-East and especially here in Assam do not miss any opportunity to witness a good football match. This fame has spread so far and wide that the FIFA World Cup Under-17 which will be hosted first time in India in 2017 has chosen Guwahati as a prime venue for the event. 
This sports meet, for me signifies a perfect blend of 3 Ts - Talent, Teamwork and Togetherness. Among us is the best and most youthful talent from across South Asia. You are proud members of your team - it can be your team of the sport you play and a larger team of the nation you are representing. And, at the same time this meet also celebrates togetherness of all South Asian nations. Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka – no matter which country we are from, we all call South Asia our home.
Sports has to be an essential part of an individual’s life. A good game is both healthy and refreshing. All round development of the personality is incomplete without sports. Most importantly, sports brings with it the most vital sportsman spirit. Without sports, there cannot be any sportsman spirit. This sportsman spirit will not only help you on the field but also in other aspects of your life. You will cherish whatever you learn on the sports field for your entire life. I always say - Jo Khele, woh Khile. The person who plays, shines. 
The mascot of these games ‘TIKHOR‘represents a baby rhino who is sharp and intelligent. It captures the spirit of sports persons and young sport lovers. 
The theme song of the games is "Ei prithivi ekhan krirangan, krira hol shantir prangan" sung by legendary late Dr. Bhupen Hazarika. 
A singer whose captivating voice left people spellbound; his song beautifully captures the spirit of South Asian Games, the spirit of peace, friendship and prosperity. 
I have been told by Shri Sarbananda Sonowalji that the Organizing Committee for the Games has brought waters from each of the eight SAARC countries and these waters will be merged to signify shared aspirations and cooperative spirit amongst the SAARC nations. 
Dr. Bhupen Hazarika’s song “We are in the same boat brother” which you are going to hear soon is all about SAARC nations. We should join hands together as a family. Let us kindle this spirit of friendship through sports in South Asian Games. 
My vision for South Asia is the same as my vision for India – Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas. All South Asian countries are partners in our journey towards development. 
We the people living in SAARC countries comprise 21 per cent of the world’s population and contribute about 9 per cent to its economy.
As we gather today to commence the 12th South Asian Games, for 23 sporting events covering both men and women, we bring sports-persons from all SAARC countries to India’s North-East and to this great city in a spirit of friendship, trust and understanding. 
I am sure that as the Games proceed, this feeling of friendship trust and understanding will convert itself not only into sporting opportunities but also into business and tourism opportunities as well. 
Let these Games become a spring board for bringing peace and prosperity in the region through business, interaction and sporting activities. Let this be an opportunity for SAARC people to realize their potential. 
Sportsmanship is a philosophy of life harmonizing in a balanced whole the qualities of endurance, will and mind. The challenge for performance, the joy of effort, the cheer of success, the spirit of friendship and fairplay in a sports arena speak volumes about how culture, education, ethics, dignity and society get intertwined with each other during such sports events. 
On the sports field, we can forget what separates us, and we can truly connect with each other in the spirit of sportsmanship and adventure. 
We can celebrate our diversity, and at the same time, be united under common rules for our sports, and the shared values of honesty and fair play. 
Let us play for peace: let us play for prosperity. Let us play with full vigour and enthusiasm so that we remember these Games even after they are over. 
The friendships you would form over these 12 days, and the memories you take back will last you a lifetime. 
I am confident that you will cherish these bonds, and become Ambassadors for peace and friendship between our nations. 
While people play for medals and provide tough competition to each other, I urge the sports-persons and visitors here to take time from their busy schedules to visit the places of tourism attraction and wonderful wildlife sanctuaries nearby.
Once again I welcome our friends from SAARC countries. Let the spirit of ‘Gurukul’ prevail for two weeks in Guwahati as sportspersons share with each other their best and take back great feeling of warmth and remarkable experience. 
Let the competition be in true sports man spirit. May the best win. 
I declare the 12th South Asian Games open. 
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
2 2 2016, India
Inauguration of medical college, Kerala
Vanakkam
I have great pleasure to be amidst all of you at Coimbatore,the textile capital of South India and the commercial hub of Tamil Nadu, to inaugurate the newly constructed buildingfor the Medical College and the Hospital. On this occasion, the Central Government has also handed overthe existing hospital, the medical college, and related buildings to the Government of Tamil Nadu.It reinforces my government’s commitment to co-operative federalism. I hope that the Government of Tamil Nadu will act quickly to start the College. 
This project worth 580 crore rupees will be a boon to ESICbeneficiariesand their family members in and around Coimbatore.Of the 100 MBBS seats proposed here, 20 seats will be reserved  for the children of persons insuredunder the ESI scheme.We should strive to make this medical college and hospital a model for high quality medical education and treatment to workers of the State. 
My government is committed to the development of a generous and comprehensive social safety net for all workers.For the over 45 crores unorganized sector workers,  we have,  in addition to the RSBY health insurance program,  started the Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana, Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana, and the Atal Pension Yojanato provide life and accident insurance. This commitment to the builders of modern India comes from the firm belief that a ‘Swasth and Samridh Shramikwill make a Samridh Rashtra’. 
We have initiated major reforms of the EPFO and ESICfor the benefit of organized sector employees. A Universal Account Number  has so far been allotted to over 6 crore sector workers, enabling portability of their EPF accounts.Further, we propose to expand coverage and offer additional facilities and services through the ESIC.
The ESI Scheme is based on the Gandhian principle of “contributions as per the ability and benefits as per the requirement”.  This principle entitles an insured person or their family members to uniform benefits though only paying a contribution proportionate to his or her wage.Apart from Medical Benefit, ESIC also provides sickness, disablement, dependants, maternity, and unemployment allowance benefits to the insured persons. Its unique character, with no restrictions on the expenditure and instances where more than 30 to 40 lakh rupees  have been spent on treatments, means that ESIC health scheme has been a boon to millions of workers. 
Friends, from itsmodest beginning in 1952 with just two centers in Kanpur and Delhi, the ESI Scheme today is implemented in 830 centers in 34 States and Union Territories.It covers over 7 lakh factories and establishments across the countryand benefits 2 crore workers and about 8 crore beneficiaries.In Tamil Nadu, the scheme has over 85,000 participating employersand over 28 lakh insured persons, with Coimbatore itself having nearly 27,000 employers.It is available in 31 districts of Tamil Nadu. 
There are ten ESI hospitals in Tamil Nadu. After handing over this hospital, there will be eight ESI Hospitals in the state run by the State Government.The ESIC Hospital Tirunelveliis proposed for upgradation from 50 to 100 beds.There is a large network of 210 ESI dispensaries in the State for out-patient treatment for the insured persons and their family members.Coimbatore itself has 50 dispensaries. 
My Government is dedicated to the welfare of our brothers and sisterswho are our Rashtra Nirmatas. Sensing the need for expansion of ESIC, I had launched a Second Generation Reform Agenda named ESIC 2.0 in July last yearduring the Indian Labour Conference held in New Delhi. 
The coverage of ESI scheme has been extended to the remaining North-East StatesArunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Manipur and Andaman & Nicobar Island. It is proposed to expand the coverage from only the industrial and commercial clusters within a district  to the entire district by 31st March this year.Since 1st August last year, the scheme has been extended to construction workers. 
I strongly believe in the improvement of public service delivery standards.In keeping with this, several initiatives have been started to improve the quality of service deliveryin ESI hospitals.They includeonline availability of electronic health record of ESI beneficiaries, establishment of an emergency medical helpline, and creation of special out patient services for senior citizens and differently-abled persons in ESIC hospitals.To improve cleanliness, the Abhiyan Indradhanushchanges bedsheets according to the rainbow pattern each day of the week.And cleanliness is an important aspect of preventive healthcare. Studies show that it can lead to savings of almost 7000 rupees per year for a poor family. 
Among other initiatives, the ESIC has resolved to adopt two model hospitals in each State,  apart from a mother and child care hospital. I am happy that ESIC proposes to expand coverage by complementing its own services with Public Private Partnerships.Apart from cancer detection, cardiology treatment, and dialysis, the Corporation also proposes to offer in a phased manner pathological and X-ray facilities in all its dispensaries through PPPs.Besides allopathic treatment, ESIC hospitals will also provide AYUSH treatment in a phased manner. 
Friends, my Government has taken a number of path-breaking steps for the welfare of workforce of our country.From September 2014, we have revised the Employee Provident Fund Organization (EPFO) pension  to a minimum of 1000 rupees per month.The wage ceiling for EPF benefits has been raised from 6500 to 15000 rupees. An EPFO Mobile App has been launched for easier access to its services for both workers and employers.The Bonus Act has been amended  to increase the ceilings for eligibility and bonus payable to 21,000 and 7000 rupees per month respectively. 
Keeping in mind our commitment to “minimum government, maximum governance”,the Ministry is simplifying central labour laws by consolidating the existing 44 laws into four labour codes. Namely, on wages, industrial relations, safety and security, and health. This would considerably increase the ease of doing business and facilitate job creation, without compromising on the genuine protections and rights available for workers.We are progressing on the reform path by building consensus on these reforms through extensive stakeholder consultations with employers, worker’s representatives, and state governments. 
A Shram Suvidha Portal has been created for online services related to 16 labor laws, including administering a process of transparent and random inspections of businesses.A LIN number has been issued to nearly one million employers,enabling them to process single online filings oneight labour laws.The services offered by ESIC and EPFOhave been integrated with the e-Biz portal of the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion to promote ease of business and limit transaction costs.Further, it is proposed to promulgatenew EPFO and ESIC Acts providing more choice, increased coverage among workers and employers, and better and expanded range of services for organized sector workers. 
Our plans to expand ESIC facilities, indeed the establishment of this medical college itself, is part of a larger plan to upgrade the facilities for medical education and specialized tertiary care.
We have also approved a scheme for up-gradation of existing State and Central Government medical colleges to increase MBBS seats. Through this, we hope to increase 10,000 MBBS seats and support the colleges with funds for equipment and infrastructure. So far 23 medical colleges have been approved to increase over 1,700 MBBS seats. I am happy to inform that  four state government medical colleges in Tamil Nadu at Coimbatore, Kanyakumari, Tirunelveli and Madurai have been approved for upgradation by adding 345 more MBBS seats. 
With similar objective, we are also promoting the establishment of AIIMS like institutions across the country. One such institution has also been approved for Tamil Nadu and with the active support of the State Government  I hope this institution will start admissions quickly. 
Friends, we all know that the Father of the Constitution is Bharat Ratna Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar. But not many of us are aware of the immense contribution made by Babasaheb to the formulation of our Labour Laws.I am therefore happy to inform thatMinistry of Labour & Employment organized a conference in Delhi last month  to commemorate the 125th Birth Anniversary Year of Dr Ambedkar.I urge each one of you to read the booklet“Dr B R Ambedkar – Labour Welfare & Empowerment: Initiatives to make his vision a reality”whichwas released on that occasion.We are committed to resolve to work collectively and collaboratively to realize the vision of Dr. Ambedkar for labour welfare. 
Friends, industrial peace and harmony can be achieved only when the goals of employment and employabilityare in tune with the goals of industrial development and growth. It is our shared vision to have an environment which is conducive for inclusive growth and development of the country. I assure the state government all the cooperation from the central government in all itsefforts in this direction.
I am encouraged to work more  for the welfare of the workforce of India and strive towards “Making India a Better Work Place for All”. 
Let us all come together in making our country the best place to work and live in. 
Jai Hind!
#DELIMITER#
2 2 2016, India
Global Ayurvedic conference, Kerala
Namaskar, distinguished guests, Ladies and Gentlemen! 
I am happy to be present here for the inaugural function of the Vision Conclave as a part of the Global Ayurveda Festival organized in God’s own country - Kerala. 
Kerala is the hub of traditional Ayurveda. This is not only due to the long, uninterrupted practice of Ayurveda in this state, but also due to the global popularity of its authentic medicines and therapies, and now, the vast, fast growing network of health resorts and hospitals of Ayurveda. 
I have been informed that the five-day Global Ayurveda Festival has turned out to be excellent in terms of participation and projection of the various facets of Ayurveda. 
It is heartening to note that foreign delegates in large numbers have come from various countries to participate in the Ayurveda festival. I am sure their participation in this festival will provide a lot of impetus to the spread of Ayurveda.
In India we have had a long great tradition of saints and hermits who evolved our own indigenous systems of healthcare, like Ayurveda, Yoga and Siddha. 
Over time, we also interacted with different civilizations and assimilated other systems of medicine as well. 
All these systems were based on the philosophy of “सर्वे भवन्तु सुखिन, सर्वे सन्तु निरामयः”. That is: All should remain happy, all should remain healthy. 
Ayurveda is generally defined as ‘Science of life’ by translating ‘Ayuh(r)’ as life and ‘Veda’ as science. Sushruta defines health as: 
Samdosha, samagni, samdhatu malakriyah Prasannatma, indriyas manah swath abhidayate. 
This means that health is balanced when all three doshas or bioenergy and agni or metabolic process are balanced, and excretions are in proper order. When atman or soul, senses, manah or intellect are in harmony with internal peace, svastha or optimal health is achieved. 
Compare this with the definition of health that the World Health Organization uses: health is a complete state of physical, mental and social well-being, and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity. So we see how strongly the principles of Ayurveda are aligned with the definition of health propagated by the WHO. 
Health is the complete state of well being and not the absence of disease. 
Today, Ayurveda is relevant globally because of its holistic and comprehensive approach to health. 
The Ayurvedic 'dincharya' or daily schedule helps to bring about peace and harmony in one's life. Ayurvedic daily life routines are meant to enhance the total health of a human being, both mental and physical. 
What are the great health challenges that the world is facing today? Non-communicable diseases, lifestyle related diseases like hypertension, diabetes, and cancers have become the greatest health challenges. WHO estimates that non-communicable diseases kill about 38 million people each year and almost three quarters of NCD deaths, that is 28 million, occur in low and middle-income countries. It is in managing these that Ayurveda offers solutions. 
The long tradition of saints and hermits who created Indian systems of healthcare like Ayurveda, yoga and siddha believes in a harmonious relationship with nature. 
These systems try to create balance and preserve health through eco-friendly practices and sustainable sourcing of medicinal herbs. 
Unfortunately, the real potential of Ayurveda is untapped because of many reasons. Most importantly because of inadequate scientific scrutiny and concerns regarding standards and quality. 
If these issues are addressed properly, I am sure Ayurveda can provide solutions to many health problems. India can be a leader in making affordable, holistic health care available to the world. 
What can we do, and what are we doing to address these issues? 
Our government is fully committed to promotion of Ayurveda and traditional systems of medicine. As soon as this government was formed, the Department of AYUSH was upgraded to the status of a full Ministry in the Government of India. 
The National AYUSH Mission has been started to promote AYUSH medical systems through cost effective AYUSH services, strengthening of educational systems, facilitating the enforcement of quality control of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani & Homoeopathy drugs and sustainable availability of raw-materials. 
For quality control of AYUSH drugs, steps are being taken to bring regulatory amendments for effective enforcement and strengthening the regulatory framework at the Central and State levels. 
Creating a vertical structure for AYUSH drugs in Central Drug Standards Control Organization, control over misleading advertisements and extension of financial support to the States under National AYUSH Mission for quality control activities are important initiatives that are underway. 
To ensure credibility of knowledge and skills of yoga experts, a Scheme for Voluntary Certification of Yoga Professionals has been launched on 22nd June last year during the “International Conference on Yoga for Holistic Health”. 
Our policy regarding Ayurveda and other Indian systems of medicine is already aligned with the Traditional Medicine Strategy 2014-2023 of WHO, which has been adopted in the World Health Assembly for implementation by 192 member countries of WHO. 
The WHO strategy contains methodologies for harnessing the potential contribution of Traditional and Complementary Medicine to health, wellness and person-centered healthcare. 
In the words of Swami Vivekananda, therefore, we shall- "COMBINE THE BEST OF EAST WITH THAT OF THE WEST". 
Modern systems of medicine have strong and effective diagnostic tools that allow us to screen and detect disease early. The use of technology in healthcare has the potential to reduce barriers to accessing care, and improve our understanding of disease patterns. 
However, we do need to look beyond. We need to look beyond providing healthcare and engage in the pursuit of good health, a combination of physical and mental well being. 
The escalating costs of treatment, the side effects of medicines have prompted medical experts to think of widening their horizons to traditional systems of medicine. 
We are committed to promote the use of traditional medicine in our Public Health System through regulation of research and appropriate integration of quality products, practices, and practitioners into the health system. 
Our efforts are to tap the real potential of Ayurveda and other AYUSH systems in imparting preventive, promotive and holistic healthcare to the people. 
We will maximize the utilization of Ayurveda and Yoga and other traditions of healing in accordance with their genius and acumen and help promotion of integrative medical facilities. Young entrepreneurs who are planning a start-up could find a lot of opportunities in holistic healthcare. 
In the context of health sector planning, while we think of the utility and contemporary relevance of Ayurveda and other traditional medical systems, it is also important to ponder over the realities and the challenges faced by these systems. 
Traditional medicine is affordable to many of the rural people. It is locally available to the communities, time-tested for its safety and efficacy. Above all, it imbibes the culture and eco-system of the communities within which it grows. 
In many parts of developing countries, traditional medical practices are the only resources of healthcare within the physical and financial reach of the poor people. 
It is therefore even more important that we ensure the quality of these systems. 
All stakeholders of Ayurveda gathered here must agree that it is important for us to address the issues of safety, efficacy, quality, access and rational use of our traditional medical knowledge of Ayurveda. We should also move closely with the emerging trends in the areas of bio-medicine, health technology and information technology.
I know that there have been great efforts in China to develop and establish policies and regulations for promoting the safe use of Traditional Chinese Medicine, which comprises a large chunk of the international trade of Complementary and Alternative Medicine. 
We will learn from the experience of other countries, and ensure that Ayurveda and other Indian systems are propagated and popularised. 
I am also told that the Delhi Declaration on Traditional Medicine adopted by the South East Asian Countries in February 2013 and later resolved by the WHO Regional Committee seeks member countries to follow harmonized approaches for developmental activities of Traditional Medicine. 
I hope, proper implementation of articles of the Delhi Declaration will help to achieve systematic development of traditional medicine including Ayurveda as well at national, regional and global level. 
We would like to offer our institutions as referral centres for training, capacity building and information & technology exchange programs in Ayurveda and other AYUSH systems. 
Our leadership on these fronts can be sustained only with concerted efforts for rendering quality healthcare and education and by producing competent professionals. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, as you are well aware, India has a long history and rich heritage of Ayurveda and Yoga. The multi-cultural origins of Ayurvedic knowledge are revealed in the classical texts themselves. Both Charaka Samhita and Sushruta Samhita urge physicians to seek the help of cowherds, hunters and forest-dwellers for procuring medicinal plants. 
In the Charaka Samhita, we notice the participation and contribution of a Central Asian physician in one of the assemblies of scholars gathered to formulate the principles of Ayurveda. 
The three major classical texts give importance to Buddhist moral values. Vagbhata, who is said to be the author of one of the classical texts Ashtangahridayam, was a Buddhist. 
It is evident, therefore, that these traditions grew by sharing knowledge, both locally as well as across cultures. They learnt from the most humble as well as those with arcane knowledge. 
We will continue this effort. We will share the knowledge of our systems with the world, and continue to enrich our traditions by learning from other systems. 
The Global Ayurveda Festival takes this vision forward. 
I wish the Vision Conclave as well as Global Ayurveda Festival a grand success. I trust that the deliberations will focus on the crucial issues important for the global positioning of Ayurveda. 
I will end with words from Ashtangahridayam, one of the most famous texts of Ayurveda. 
The poor, those suffering from disease and those afflicted by sorrow should be helped. Even insects and ants should be treated with compassion, just as one's own self. 
This is the guiding spirit of Ayurveda. Let this be the guiding spirit for all of us. 
Thank You
#DELIMITER#
29 1 2016, India
Economics times business summit
Shri Vineet Jain 
Distinguished Guests Ladies and Gentlemen 
I am very happy to be here today. The global economy is going through a period of uncertainty. At a time like this I am glad that so many participants not only from India, but also from abroad have taken the time to come here. I am sure all of us in India will benefit from the experience of other countries. I will take this opportunity to present to you some of my thoughts on the progress of the Indian economy and on the business environment.
Some of you may recall what I have said before - that true reforms are those which result in transformation in the lives of citizens. As I have said before, my goal is “reform to transform”. Let me start with the basics. What should be the basic guiding principles of economic policy in any country, particularly for the developing countries? 
Firstly, we have to improve the use of our natural and human resources, to increase the value addition we can get from them. This means increasing the efficiency in allocation of resources. It means greater managerial efficiency. It means removing unnecessary controls and distortions. 
Secondly, we should create new opportunities for citizens to progress and also give them a choice of opportunities. Opportunity is like oxygen to the aspirational citizen and we are keen that this is never in short supply. In simple terms, it means Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas. 
Thirdly, we have to increase the quality of life of the common citizen and even more so, the quality of life of the poor. Quality of life may have an economic aspect, but it is not economics alone. If a government is progressive, and runs an honest and efficient administration, the biggest beneficiaries are the poor. I know from my experience, that poor governance hurts the poor more than it hurts others. Therefore, improved governance is as important as economic reform.
We live in a globally connected world. Actions of one country affect another. Such actions are not only based on trade and investment but also in matters of pollution and environment. A poet had said that no man is an island. Today it can be said that no country can live alone. It is often said that all politics is local. To me, all economics is global. Indeed the distinction between domestic affairs and foreign affairs is increasingly losing relevance. For a country in the modern day, it is not sufficient that its economic policies should only address its domestic priorities. To me, India’s policies must be such that they make a positive contribution to the rest of the world. 
Many of you are aware of the contribution India can make to the global economy at a time of economic stagnation in many parts. For the last four quarters, India has been the fastest growing large economy in the world. In 2014-15, India contributed 7.4% of global GDP in purchasing power terms. But it contributed 12.5% of global growth. Thus its contribution to growth is 68% higher than its share of the global economy. FDI in India has increased by 39% in the last 18 months, at a time when global FDI has fallen. 
But a country’s contribution goes beyond economics. Protecting our planet from climate change is one of the most important tasks for this generation. If one country reduces its environmental footprint, it creates benefits for all others. It is for this reason that in the COP 21 Summit, India made far reaching commitments towards the larger welfare of the planet. In history, every country that has grown has increased its per capita emissions footprint. We are committed to re-writing that history. We are committed to reducing the emission intensity of our GDP by 33% by 2030 even while growing at a fast pace. For a country which is already at a very low base of per capita emission, this is a very ambitious target. We have committed that by 2030, 40% of our electric power capacity will be from non-fossil fuel. We have also committed to building an additional carbon sink of over 2.5 billion tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent. This will be done by creating additional forest cover by 2030. This commitment is from a country with a very low per capita land availability. We have taken the lead in launching an international solar alliance, involving 121 countries falling between the Tropic of Cancer and the Tropic of Capricorn. This initiative will help many developing countries, from Africa to South America, to take advantage of developments in renewable energy around the world. 
Let me now return to the three policy objectives I mentioned. I will start with the performance of Indian economy. Economists talk about GDP growth, inflation, investment, and the fiscal deficit as key economic parameters. Since this Government took office, growth has increased and inflation has decreased. Foreign investment has increased and the fiscal deficit has decreased. And despite a slow-down in global trade, the balance of payments deficit has also decreased. 
Yet, such broad statistics give only a partial picture of what we are attempting, and what we are achieving. It is often said “the devil is in the detail”. But I believe that God is in the proper execution of many so-called details. It is these so-called details which, when done well, add up to a big picture. 
You may be interested to know that • India’s highest ever urea fertiliser production was achieved in 2015. 
• India’s highest ever production of ethanol as blended fuel, benefiting sugar cane farmers, was in 2015. 
• The highest number of new cooking gas connections to the rural poor was achieved in 2015. 
• India’s highest ever output of coal was achieved in 2015. 
• India’s highest ever generation of electricity was achieved in 2015 
• India’s highest ever quantity of cargo handled by major ports was in 2015. 
• India’s fastest average turnaround time in ports was in 2015. • India’s highest ever increase in railway capital expenditure was achieved in 2015. 
• India’s highest ever number of new highway kilometres awarded was in 2015. 
• India’s highest ever production of motor vehicles was achieved in 2015 
• India’s highest ever software exports were achieved in 2015. 
• India’s highest ever rank in World Bank Doing Business indicators, was achieved in 2015. 
• India’s highest ever foreign exchange reserves were achieved in 2015. 
When I give these figures, it is important to remember that in the preceding years, many of these indicators were moving in the opposite direction. Not only have many indicators improved, but they have improved by large margins. For example, in 2013-14, the total number of National Highway kilometres awarded was about 3500. This more than doubled in the first year of this Government to nearly 8000 kilometres, an all-time high. This year we are planning to award 10,000 kilometres. 
Let me give you more examples of quantum leaps. The Shipping Corporation of India which made a loss of Rs. 275 crores in 2013-14 made a profit of Rs. 201 crores in 2014-15. This is a turnaround of Rs. 475 crores in one single year. 
In 2013-14, India accounted for just 0.1% of global demand for energy efficient LED lighting. In 2015-16, it is 12%. Indian LED bulbs are now the cheapest and most competitive in the world, costing less than a dollar versus a global average of 3 dollars. In 2013-14, India commissioned 947 megawatts of solar power plants. In 2015-16, this will rise to over 2500 megawatts. It is expected to reach 12,000 megawatts in 2016-17. India’s share of the global solar energy market will rise from 2.5% in 2014 to 18% in 2016. India’s contribution here is not merely in increasing the share of clean energy. Its other contribution is that the huge increase in scale has enabled producers to cut prices benefitting the whole world. In 2013-14, 16,800 kilometres of transmission lines were added. In 2014-15 this rose to over 22,000, an increase of 32%. In the power sector as a whole, the cost of power has declined by over 30%. 
Let me turn to the second aspect — improving opportunities. I believe in the politics of empowerment. I believe in empowering the people to improve their own lives. We undertook the world’s largest and most successful financial inclusion programme. It has brought over two hundred million unbanked people into the banking system. In the early days of this programme, sceptics felt that these accounts would have no balances. You will be surprised to know that today these accounts have a balance exceeding Rs. thirty thousand crores or over four billion dollars. We have also issued a record number of debit cards to them. India is now one of the few countries where the market share of an indigenous credit card brand exceeds 33%. 
We have introduced a new and comprehensive program of crop insurance. This empowers farmers to give their best, with the State providing cover against risks beyond the farmer’s control. 
We have introduced soil health cards to empower our farmers. The card will tell every farmer the exact character of his soil. This will enable him to increase crop yield, reduce over-use of chemical inputs and fertilizer and restore soil health. 
Entrepreneurship is one of India's traditional strengths. It was sad to see it neglected in the last few years. “Business” and “profits” had become bad words. We have changed that. We need to value enterprise and hard work, not wealth. Our programs ranging from MUDRA to Start Up India and Stand-Up India provide opportunity to the hard working and to the enterprising. In so doing, we have placed special emphasis on Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes and women. We are empowering them to become masters of their own destinies. 
Creating opportunities for cities and towns to grow is very crucial. Urban areas are an engine of growth. A key initiative for urban transformation is the Smart City Mission. The Mission has several ‘firsts’. It is the first time that certain areas in cities will be comprehensively developed in a systematic and qualitative way. These areas will act as ‘light houses’ which will eventually influence the rest of the city. It is the first time that there has been such extensive citizen consultation. Nearly 2.5 million people participated through contests, discussions, polls, blogs and talks on the MyGov platform. This is a major break from the top-down approach to urban planning. It is the first time that allocation of funds in a government scheme is done not by decisions of Ministers or officers but on the basis of competition. This is a good example of competitive and cooperative federalism. 
As I mentioned earlier, the role of a Government does not end with the economy alone. There are many non-economic dimensions which are vital for ensuring the welfare of the citizens. Good governance is crucial. We have taken numerous steps which have transformative potential. We have ended the era of high level corruption. This is a fact acknowledged by Indians and foreigners, and by critics and supporters of this Government. This is not an easy achievement. We have ended political interference and crony capitalism in nationalized banks. We have for the first time appointed several heads of public sector banks from the private sector. Transparent auctions have cleaned up the natural resources sector which was riddled with scandals. 
Many experts have commented on the need to reduce subsidies. The new universal access to banking through the Jan Dhan Yojana, has enabled plugging of huge leakages in subsidies. In developing countries, fuel subsidies are generally very difficult to tackle. We have successfully decontrolled cooking gas prices. We are now operating the world’s largest direct benefit transfer scheme for cooking gas. Subsidies are transferred to the bank account of households. Through electronic verification, multiple and bogus connections are eliminated. This enables genuine beneficiaries to get what they deserve while eliminating those who are not eligible. This has substantially reduced the subsidy. 
Another subsidized fuel is kerosene, used by the poor for cooking and lighting, and distributed by state governments. There is clear evidence that a large quantity of subsidized kerosene is misused and diverted. We have begun a pilot in thirty three districts where kerosene will be sold at market prices. The difference between market price and the subsidized price will be transferred directly to bank accounts of those who are poor. The poor will be properly identified through bank accounts and biometric identification through Aadhaar. This will eliminate duplicate, non-eligible and bogus consumers. This elimination will reduce the total subsidy. We have decided that 75% of the savings from this will be passed on to the states. Thereby, we have encouraged state governments to implement this in all districts. 
The experience of Chandigarh, shows that this is possible. In April 2014, there were 68,000 beneficiaries of subsidized kerosene in Chandigarh. A campaign was launched to issue gas connections to all eligible families. 10,500 new gas connections were issued. Kerosene quotas were stopped for 42,000 families who already had gas connections. By 31st March, 2016, Chandigarh will be declared kerosene-free. Believe it or not, till date, the saving achieved in kerosene consumption through this initiative is 73%! 
Two days ago at a meeting with Chief Secretaries of the States, I was reviewing implementation of various pension schemes. I was pleasantly surprised to see that there had been noteworthy reduction in leakage, simply by eliminating those who were double counted and who were ineligible. In some states, a reduction of 12% in subsidies has been achieved without any harm to the poor. 
Another major subsidy is on fertilizer. A substantial quantity of subsidized urea is diverted illegally to use in the production of chemicals. We have introduced a simple but effective technical solution: neem-coating of urea. The organic neem coating makes the fertilizer unsuitable for diversion. We have now achieved 100% neem coating in both domestic and imported urea. A significant side benefit has also happened. The collection of neem leaves for urea has become a new income earning opportunity for rural women.
I know that several of you are economists. Economists generally believe that human beings are rational. They believe people will not give up a benefit for which they are entitled. Last year, I gave a call to citizens. I asked them to give up their cooking gas subsidies, if they felt they were not poor enough to get it. We also made a promise. Every connection given up, would be used to give a new gas connection to a poor family. Poor women in rural India use firewood or biomass and suffer greatly because of smoke. This scheme is entirely voluntary. You may be surprised to learn that nearly 6.5 million people in India have responded to my call. It warms my heart, to see that so many of them have come forward, with no compulsion to benefit the poor and give up their subsidies. Already, over 5 million new connections have been given to the poor. It is a sign of the public spirit and the self-respect which prevails among Indians and shows the potential of citizen action. Another example where citizens have responded is in the case of Khadi. In October 2014, I had appealed to all Indians to buy at least one Khadi garment. In response, Khadi sales have increased substantially. 
We have taken a creative approach to tackling the problem of loss making power distribution companies. Under the UDAY programme, short term debt relief is given by state governments taking over bank loans. But this is accompanied by strong long term conditions to hold both the distribution companies and the states. This will create the conditions for rolling out 24x7 power supply. 
Our country suffers from an excess of old and unnecessary laws which obstruct people and businesses. We began the exercise of identifying unnecessary laws and repealing them. 1,827 Central laws have been identified for repeal. Out of these, 125 have already been repealed. Bills for repealing another 758 have been passed by the Lok Sabha and are awaiting the approval of the Upper House. 
I have given just a few examples of the potential of improved governance. The benefits of improved governance and reduced corruption are lasting and profound. If our policies are studied closely, you will find that many are popular, but none are populist. Every one of the changes we have made is in the direction of good governance and rationality. 
I have been referring to cooking gas, fertilizer and kerosene subsidies. I must confess that I am surprised by the way words are used by experts on this matter. When a benefit is given to farmers or to the poor, experts and government officers normally call it a subsidy. However, I find that if a benefit is given to industry or commerce, it is usually called an “incentive” or a “subvention”. We must ask ourselves whether this difference in language also reflects a difference in our attitude? Why is it that subsidies going to the well-off are portrayed in a positive manner? Let me give you an example. The total revenue loss from incentives to corporate tax payers was over Rs. 62,000 crores. Dividends and long term capital gains on shares traded in stock exchanges are totally exempt from income tax even though it is not the poor who earn them. Since it is exempt, it is not even counted in the Rs. 62,000 crores. Double Taxation avoidance treaties have in some cases resulted in double non-taxation. This also is not counted in the Rs. 62,000 crores. Yet these are rarely referred to by those who seek reduction of subsidies. Perhaps these are seen as incentives for investment. I wonder whether, if the fertiliser subsidy is re-named as “incentive for agricultural production”, some experts will view it differently. 
I am not arguing that all subsidies are good. My point is that there cannot be any ideological position on such matters. We have to be pragmatic. We have to eliminate bad subsidies, whether or not they are called subsidies. But some subsidies may be necessary to protect the poor and the needy and give them a fair chance to succeed. Hence my aim is not to eliminate subsidies but to rationalize and target them. 
In 19 months, much has been achieved. Much more is expected of us. And there are challenges ahead. Yet, I am now confident • that we can successfully go forward, • that we can successfully go faster, • and that we can do so in a way that will benefit the common people. 
When the people of a nation make up their minds to go forward and when the power of the people is with us, hard challenges become huge opportunities. This confidence of mine is not formed in a vacuum, but founded on my experience over the last 19 months. 
We inherited a struggling economy, just recovering from a currency crisis. In less than two years, we have taken India to the top of global league tables of foreign investment and growth. Friends, we have a long way to go but I feel ours is a journey well begun. Like all long journeys, there may be obstacles on the way, but I am confident we will reach our destination. We have created a platform for a new future and for a new India: 
An India where every child is born safely and maternal and infant mortality are below world averages, 
An India where no person is houseless, 
An India where every town and every village, every school and every train, every street and every house, are clean and sanitary, 
An India where every citizen has access to good health care, 
An India where every village has 24x7 electricity, 
An India where every city is vibrant and livable, 
An India where girls are educated and empowered, 
An India where every boy and every girl is skilled and ready for productive employment, 
An India where agriculture, industry and services provide well-paying jobs to all who need them, 
An India where farmers know the nature of their soil, have the best inputs and reach global levels of productivity, 
An India where enterprises, large and small, have access to capital and credit, 
An India where start-ups and other businesses provide innovative solutions, 
An India which is at the forefront of a global digital economy, 
An India which leads the world in clean energy, 
An India where every citizen has basic social security and a pension in old age, 
An India where citizens trust Government and are trusted by Government. 
And above all, a transformed India where all citizens have the opportunity to reach their full potential. 
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
19 1 2016, Japan
Tokyo meet
I am delighted that the Tokyo Foundation is hosting a conclave on the theme of “Asian Values and Democracy” on January 19 as follow-up of the conclave held by Vivekananda International Foundation in Delhi last year.
The theme of the two-day conference held in Delhi in September 2015 was “Conflict Avoidance and Environmental Consciousness” from the Hindu Buddhist civilizational perspective.
It is universally accepted that this century belongs to Asia. Asia is at the crossroads of a very special moment in the history of humanity. This is a continent bustling with energy, enthusiasm and exuberance, driven by the dynamism of a youthful population that is constantly innovating.
All Asian civilizations, Indic, Shinto, or Dao, had had a common value system which could avoid conflicts among humans and between humans and nature-- the conflict among states being different. That common value system recognizes, accepts and even celebrates diversity among humans. This is what leads to conflict avoidance as it is founded on harmony in diversity. Conflict avoidance based on harmonizing the diversity of humans is inherent in Asian democracy as its basic value.
Our idea of democracy is not just a game of numbers mediated by the rules of majority and minority as it happens in numerical democracies. Our democratic approach is founded on consensus. It does not rest on the idea of rights alone but also includes duties. The Indian constitution provides for moral fundamental duties of individuals towards one another and to the creation which sustains us all.
Our idea of democracy is founded on values which recognize the space of not only humans but also of nature -- animals and plants -- which incorporates the principles of environment.
The inclusion of nature and environment makes our life and approach less anthropocentric and more eco-centric.
Great Indian thinkers like Maharishi Aurobindo, Swami Vivekananda and Rabindranath Tagore have envisioned Asian unity in this higher sense of the term.
I am sure that with its theme of Asian Values and Democracy, the Tokyo Conclave will enable India and Japan to expand articulate and include the concepts of conflict avoidance and environmental consciousness as integral to our larger democratic framework.
With this I wish the Tokyo Conclave all success. I send my heartiest congratulations to the Tokyo Foundation and the Japanese government for having organized this meeting.
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
3 1 2016, India
International conference on frontiers in yoga research
The Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi, today inaugurated the International Conference on Frontiers in Yoga Research and its applications, at Jigani, Bengaluru.
He unveiled the Foundation Stone for a hospital of integrative medicine.
Following is the text of the Prime Minister’s inaugural address:
Governor of Karnataka Shri Vajubhai Vala,
Chief Minister of Karnataka Shri Siddaramaiah,
My valued colleagues in the Council of Ministers,
Dr. Nagendra,
Dignitaries on the dais, esteemed guests from all over the world and Yoga enthusiasts,
It is a great pleasure and privilege to participate in the 21st International Conference on frontiers in yoga research and its applications.
Iam deeply grateful to Vivekananda Yoga Anusandhan Sansthan for organizing this conference.
Vivekananda’s vision was a synthesis of a deep reading of the Indian and Western thought, and drew its spirit from our ancient philosophy and knowledge.
He not only made a unique contribution to the spiritual revival of India, he also placed our timeless wisdom before the world.
He had a deep understanding of the beauty of human diversity and spoke passionately for unity in our world.
This is a particularly special year for the science of yoga.
On June 21, more than a million people in 192 countries came together to celebrate the first International Day of Yoga.
The overwhelming global support is a mark of Yoga's growing international popularity.
It is also a symbol of the universal aspiration for health and well being.
It reflects the shared global desire for balance between human and Mother Nature; and, peace and harmony between people and nations.
Above all, it demonstrated once again the capacity of people from different cultures to reach beyond the familiar boundaries of their lives and unite in pursuit of a larger good.
It is this spirit of unity that demonstrates the timeless science of yoga.
And, it is this belief in the power of yoga and faith in humanity that I proposed this initiative in my inaugural address to the United Nations General Assembly in September 2014.
When it comes to a sustainable future for our world, a healthy habit and happier people, a change in our way of life that influences the choices we make as individuals, nations and global community is important.
This is a recognition that is dawning on the world. And, across cultures and geography, people are increasingly taking to yoga to redefine their lives - to find oneness between their inner self and outer world; between their existence and their environment.
The WHO fact sheet on the global burden of disease says that non-communicable diseases are the leading causes of death worldwide. In 2008, 80 percent of deaths due to these diseases were in developing countries, up from 40 percent in 1990.
By 2030, low-income countries will have eight times more deaths attributed to NCDs than high-income countries.
In India, cardiovascular diseases, cancers, chronic respiratory diseases, diabetes, and other Non Communicable Diseases are estimated to account for 60% of all deaths. These diseases account for about 40% of all hospital stays and roughly 35% of all recorded outpatient visits.
We face the tragedy of productive lives cut short and families that must deal with untimely loss; the huge toll on the economy; and, the excessive burden on the over-stretched health system.
Some studies have estimated that India stands to lose about 4.58 trillion dollars before 2030 due to non communicable diseases and mental health conditions.
So, we must address the question of psychological state of our existence as much as we try to advance our physical and material life.
This is where the role of Yoga is paramount. Across the world, there are moving stories of transformed lives and rekindled hopes due to Yoga.
The prediction of Shri Aurobindo that “Indian Yoga ... is potentially one of these dynamic elements of the future life of humanity” is coming true.
This discipline was not originally considered or conceived as system of medicine. But, because Yoga is about aholistic lifestyle and the physical, mental, intellectual, emotional, moral and spiritual harmony, it has profound health benefits.
It fits well with the change in the way that world increasingly defines health. We are no longer satisfied with just preventing and managing diseases. People now demand promotion of wellness, which is a healthy balance of the mind, body and spirit.
We now increasingly hear voices calling for holistic treatment, which means dealing not just with the immediate ailment, but with the complete person, physically, psychologically, socially, and spiritually.
Traditional Indian systems are rooted in looking at human beings in totality. They see the link between Adhi or problems at the mind level and Vyadhi or problems at the physical level.
They probe deeper causes, not just look at symptoms. They treat the person, not just cure the disease. They may at times take longer to take effect, but they tend to have deeper and longer impact. And, they are without side effects.
As I argued at the Science Congress this morning, like traditional knowledge, science has also evolved through human experiences and exploration of Nature. So, we must recognize that science, as we see it, does not constitute the only form of empirical knowledge about the world.
And, we must remember that the western system of thought, from Hippocrates to Percival to Edison have expressed views on health that are not fundamentally different from the philosophy of the Indian System.
So, along with the accumulated wisdom and experience gathered over the ages, we must also apply the techniques and methods of modern science to test and validate results, assure quality and explain benefits.
And, this is why we are placing emphasis on our efforts to increase awareness, acceptance and adoption of AYUSH System of Medicine.
And, in doing so, we will create better wellness among people, rely more on local resources and reduce healthcare costs.
We will also reduce the social and economic costs to our society and promote a more environment friendly healthcare system.
I am not here to advocate the supremacy of one system over another. I believe that humanity is wealthier for its diversity. Civilisations, cultures and countries have enriched each other by sharing their knowledge and wisdom. And, we can progress more by learning from each other.
It is in this spirit that Swami Vivekananda called for combining the best from the East and the West.
So, it must be in the area of healthcare. My vision for healthcare is an integrated system that understands and builds on the best and most effective of different traditions.
This is why I deeply appreciate your effort to integrate Yoga, Ayurveda, Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, Homeopathy and Modern Medicine by bringing prominent researchers and doctors on one platform.Your focus on four major non-communicable diseases - Diabetes, Cancer, Psychiatric disorders, Hypertension and Cardiovascular diseases is appreciable.
It addresses issues that are very close to my heart.
Modern systems of medicine have transformed healthcare; screening, detection and diagnosis of diseases. Use of technology has reduced barriers to accessing health care, and improved our understanding of disease patterns. Breakthroughs in medicines and vaccines have helped conquer and contain many diseases.
But, as our understanding of its limitation and its side effects have grown, as we have experienced the growing costs of modern medicine systems, we have begun to look beyond to traditional systems, not just in India, but in other countries as well.
Their popularity is growing. Yoga is now a global heritage. And, the world is embracing traditional Indian medicine with great enthusiasm.
So, we look to you at this conference to define the path forward in the service of humanity.
I hope that health professionals, policymakers, government organizations and Industry will bridge the distance between the various forms of medical systems.
I hope that you will to integrate yoga and traditional Indian medicine more closely into our healthcare system and make wellness a part of life for all in India and rest of the world.
You will contribute not only to healthier and happier life for people, but also to a more prosperous and peaceful world, and a more sustainable future for our planet. Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
3 1 2016, India
Indian Science Congress
Governor of Karnataka Shri Vajubhai Vala 
Chief Minister of Karnataka, Shri Siddaramaiah 
My cabinet colleagues, Dr Harsh Vardhan and Shri Y.S.Chowdary 
Bharat Ratna Professor C.N.R. Rao 
Prof A.K.Saxena; 
Prof. K.S. Rangappa, 
Nobel Laureates and Field Medalist 
Distinguished scientists and delegates,
It is a great pleasure to begin the year in the company of leaders of science and technology from India and the world. 
For our confidence about the future of India comes from our faith in you. 
It is a huge honour and privilege to address the 103rd Science Congress in the centenary year of the University of Mysore. 
Some of the tallest leaders of India have passed through the doors of this respected institution. 
The great philosopher and India’s second President Dr. Radhakrishnan and Bharat Ratna Professor CNR Rao are among them. 
The history of the Science Congress and the University of Mysore began around the same time. 
It was the time of a new awakening in India. It sought not just freedom, but also human advancement in India. 
It wanted not just an independent India, but an India that could stand independently on the strength of its human resources, scientific capabilities and industrial development. 
This university is a testimony to the vision of a great generation of Indians. 
Now, we have launched yet another revolution of empowerment and opportunities in India. 
And, we are once again turning to our scientists and innovators to realize our goals of human welfare and economic development. 
The world has progressed because of human instinct to enquire and explore for knowledge but also to address human challenges. 
No one reflected this spirit more than late President Dr. APJ Abdul Kalam.
His was a life of outstanding scientific achievements; and, his was a heart of boundless compassion and concern for humanity. 
For him, the highest purpose of science was the transformation of the life of the weak, the under-privileged and the youth.
And, his life’s mission was a self-reliant and a self-assured India that was strong and cared for its people. 
Your theme for this Congress is a fitting tribute to his vision.
And, it is leaders like Professor Rao and President Kalam, and scientists like you, who have placed India at the forefront of science and technology in many areas. 
Our success spans from the core of the tiny atom to the vast frontier of space. We have enhanced food and health security; and, we have given hope for a better life to others in the world. 
As we increase the level of our ambition for our people, we will also have to increase the scale of our efforts. 
So, for me, good governance is not just about policy and decision making, transparency and accountability. It is also about integrating science and technology into the choices we make and the strategies we pursue. 
Our digital networks are expanding the quality and reach of public services and social benefits for the poor. And, in the first ever National Space Conference, we identified 170 applications that touch almost every aspect of governance, development and conservation. 
We are launching Startup India that will encourage innovation and enterprise. We are creating technology incubators in academic institutions. And, I have asked for a framework of Scientific Audit for scientific departments and institutions in the government. 
It is with the same spirit of cooperative federalism that is shaping centre-state relations in every area, that I am encouraging greater scientific collaboration between Central and State institutions and agencies. 
We will also try to increase the level of resources for science, and deploy them in accordance with our strategic priorities, 
We will make it easier to do science and research in India, improve science administration, and expand the supply and improve the quality of science education and research in India. 
At the same time, innovation must not be just the goal of our science. Innovation must also drive the scientific process. Frugal innovation and crowd sourcing are examples of efficient and effective scientific enterprise.
And, innovation in approach is not just the obligation of the government, but also the responsibility of the private sector and the academia. 
In a world of resource constraints and competing claims, we have to be smart in defining our priorities. And, it is especially important in India, where challenges are many and the scale is enormous – from health and hunger to energy and economy. 
Distinguished delegates, 
Today, I wanted to speak to you about one of the biggest challenges for the world, and one that dominated global attention last year –to define a path to a more prosperous future for our world and a more sustainable future for our planet. 
In 2015, the world took two historic steps. 
Last September, the United Nations adopted the Development Agenda for 2030. It places elimination of poverty by the end of 2030 and economic development at the top of our priorities, but with equal emphasis on sustainability of our environment and our habitats.
And, last November in Paris, the world came together to craft a historic agreement to change the course of our planet. 
But, we achieved something else that is equally important. 
We succeeded in bringing innovation and technology to the heart of the climate change discourse. 
We were consistent in our message that it is not enough to speak of targets and restraints. It is essential to find solutions that help us transition easily to a future of clean energy. 
I also said in Paris that innovation is important not just for combating climate change, but also for climate justice. For, the developed world must leave enough of the little carbon space left for developing countries to grow. 
For this, we need research and innovation to make clean energy technology available, accessible and affordable for all. 
At Paris, President Hollande, President Obama and I joined a number of global leaders for an Innovation Summit.
We pledged to double national investments in innovation; and, build a global partnership that combines the responsibility of governments with the innovative capacity of the private sector. 
I also suggested an international network of 30-40 universities and labs focusing for next ten years on transforming the way we produce, distribute and consume energy. We will also pursue this in G 20. 
We need innovation to make renewable energy much cheaper; more reliable; and, easier to connect to transmission grids. 
This is especially critical for India to achieve our target of adding 175 GW of renewable generation by 2022. 
We must also make fossil fuel like coal cleaner and more efficient. And, we should tap newer sources of renewable energy, from ocean waves to geothermal energy. 
At a time when energy sources that fueled the industrial age have put our planet in peril, and, as the developing world now seeks to lift billions of people into prosperity, the world must turn to Sun to power our future. 
So, at Paris, India launched an International Solar Alliance to forge a partnership between solar-rich countries. 
We need science and technology not just to make clean energy an integral part of our existence, but also to combat the impact of climate change on our lives.
We have to develop climate resilient agriculture. We must understand the impact of climate change on our weather, biodiversity, glaciers, and oceans; and, how to adjust to them. We must strengthen our ability to forecast natural disasters. 
Distinguished delegates, 
We must also address the rising challenges of rapid urbanisation. This will be critical for a sustainable world. 
For the first time in human history, we are in an urban century. By the middle of this century, two-thirds of the world’s population will live in cities. A little less than 3.0 billion people will join the existing 3.5 billion urban dwellers. And, 90% of the increase will come from developing countries. 
Many urban clusters in Asia will exceed the population of mid-sized countries elsewhere in the world. 
More than 50% of India will be living in urban habitats by 2050. And, by 2025, India may already have more than 10% of the global urban population. 
Studies suggest that nearly 40% of the global urban population lives in informal settlements, or slums, where they face a range of health and nutritional challenges. 
Cities are the major engines of economic growth, employment opportunities and prosperity. 
But, cities account for more than two-thirds of global energy demand and result in up to 80% of global greenhouse gas emission. 
That is why I have placed so much emphasis on smart cities. 
It is not just about cities that are networked to become more efficient, safe and better in delivery of services. It is also a vision of sustainable cities that are both locomotives of our economies and havens of healthy living. 
We will need sound policies to achieve our goals, but we will rely on science and technology to provide creative solutions. 
We must develop better scientific tools to improve city planning with sensitivity to local ecology and heritage; and, reduce the demand for transportation, improve mobility and reduce congestion.
Much of our urban infrastructure is yet to be built. We must maximise the use of local material with scientific improvements; and, and make buildings more energy efficient. 
We have to find affordable and practical solutions for solid waste management; converting waste into building material and energy; and, recycling waste water. 
Urban agriculture and ecology should get more attention. And, our children must breathe cleaner city air. And, we need solutions that are comprehensive and rooted in science and innovation. 
We need your inputs to make our cities more immune to the consequences of natural disasters and our homes more resilient. This will also mean making retrofit of buildings affordable. 
Distinguished delegates, 
A sustainable future for this planet will depend not only on what we do on land, but also on how we treat our oceans. 
Oceans occupy more than 70% of our planet; and, over 40% of humanity and 60% of the world’s largest cities are found within 100 kilometers of the coast. 
We are at the cusp of a new era, where oceans will become important drivers of our economies. Their sustainable use can bring prosperity; and, give us clean energy, new medicines and food security beyond just fisheries. 
That is why I refer to the Small Island States as Large Ocean States. 
Ocean is critical to India’s future, too, with over 1300 islands, a 7500 km coastline and 2.4 million square kilometers of Exclusive Economic Zone. 
That is why, in the past year, we have increased our focus on ocean or blue economy. We will raise the level of our scientific efforts in marine science.
We will set up an advanced centre of research in marine biology and biotechnology and establish a network of coastal and island research stations in India and abroad. 
We have entered into agreements on marine science and ocean economy with several countries. We will also hold an International Conference on “Ocean economy and Pacific Island Countries” in New Delhi in 2016. 
Distinguished delegates, 
Rivers have played as important a role in human history as oceans. Civilisations have been nurtured by rivers. And, rivers will remain critical for our future.
So, revival of rivers is an essential part of my commitment for a cleaner and healthier future for our society, economic opportunities for our people, and renewal of our heritage. 
We need regulations, policy, investments and management to achieve our objective. But, we will succeed only when we integrate technology, engineering and innovation into our efforts, not just to clean our rivers now but to keep them healthy in the future as well. 
For this, we also need scientific understanding of the impact of urbanisation, farming, industrialisation and groundwater use and contamination on the river eco-system. 
River is the soul of Nature. Their renewal must be an element of a larger effort to sustain Nature. 
In India, we see humanity as part of Nature, not outside or superior to it, and divinity manifested in Nature's diverse forms.
So, conservation is rooted in the natural instincts of our culture and tradition, and in our commitment to the future. 
India has a rich heritage of ecological knowledge. We have scientific institutions and human resources to mount concerted national action on conservation of Nature that is rooted firmly in scientific studies and methods.
Distinguished delegates, 
And, if we wish to restore the harmony between human and Nature, we must also harness the full potential of traditional knowledge. 
Societies across the world have developed this enormous wealth through wisdom gathered over the ages. 
And, they hold the secrets to economic, efficient, and, environment friendly solutions to many of our problems. 
But, today they are at risk of extinction in our globalised world. 
Like traditional knowledge, science has also evolved through human experiences and exploration of Nature. So, we must recognize that science, as we see it, does not constitute the only form of empirical knowledge about the world. 
And, we must bridge the distance between traditional knowledge and modern science, so that we can craft local and more sustainable solutions for our challenges. 
So, in agriculture, even as we seek to make our farms yield more, reduce the intensity of our water use, or increase the nutrient content of our farm output, 
we should also integrate traditional techniques, local practices and organic farming to make our agriculture less resource intensive and more resilient. 
And, in the area of health, modern medicines have transformed healthcare. But, we must also use scientific techniques and methods to delve deeper into traditional medicines and practices like Yoga for more holistic lifestyle and change our paradigm from treatment to wellness. 
This is especially important in dealing with growing challenge of lifestyle diseases that take a huge toll in terms of human lives and economic costs. 
Distinguished delegates, 
As a nation we still inhabit many worlds. 
We are at the global frontiers of achievements in science and technology. 
We also see the uncertainty and despair of many living at the edge of existence, looking for a life of hope, opportunity, dignity and equity. 
We must meet these aspirations at a speed and on a scale that is rare in human history.
And, from the richness of our tradition, the consciousness of our age and the strength of our commitment to our world, we must choose the most sustainable path possible. 
The success of one-sixth of humanity will also mean a more prosperous and a sustainable future for the world. 
We can only do this with your leadership and support.
We will realise it when, in the words of Vikram Sarabhai, “we encourage scientists to interest themselves in problems outside their fields of specialization.” 
And, the impact of science will be the most when scientists and technologists will keep the principles of what I call Five Es at the centre of their enquiry and engineering: 
Economy – when we find cost effective and efficient solutions 
Environment – when our carbon footprint is the lightest and the impact on the ecology is the least possible 
Energy – when our prosperity relies less on energy; and the energy we use keeps our skies blue and our earth green. 
Empathy – when our efforts are in tune with our culture, circumstances and social challenges. 
Equity – when science advances inclusive development and improves the welfare of the weakest. 
This year we mark a hundred years of a significant moment in the history of science, when Albert Einstein published in 1916 “The Foundation of the General Theory of Relativity”. Today, we must recall the humanism that defined his thought: “Concern for man himself and his fate must always form the chief interest of all technical endeavours. “ 
Nothing can be a higher duty for us, whether we are in public life, or we are private citizens, and whether we are in business or explore science, than to leave the planet in a better state for our future generations. 
Let the different disciplines of science, technology and engineering unite behind this common purpose. 
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
27 12 2015, India
mann ki baat
Fellow citizens, Namaskar to all.  This will be the last edition of Mann ki Baat in 2015. The next edition of Mann ki Baat will be in 2016.  We celebrated Christmas and preparations are now on to ring in the New Year. 
India is land of diversities.. We celebrate a whole lot of festivals. One is not done with one festival, in the mean time the second one comes along. In a way one festival leaves us waiting for another. At times it feels India is one such country which has a ‘festival driven economy’. It becomes a source of the economic activities for even the poor sections of the society. Greetings from my end for a Merry Christmas to all Indians and I also wish you all a Happy New Year. May 2016 usher in lots of joys in your lives. I hope that new zeal, new excitement and new pledges may take you to new heights. May the world be free of crises, be it from terrorism, from global warming or from natural calamities or manmade tragedies. There can be no greater happiness than the humanity having a peaceful existence.
You are aware that I use a lot of technology which provides me lots of information. I keep a watchful eye on my portal “My Gov”.
Mr. Ganesh V. Savleshwarkar has written to me from Pune that this season is a tourist season. A large number of foreign and domestic tourists travel across the country. People also travel to celebrate Christmas vacations. He says most of the facilities related to tourism are catered to but special emphasis should be laid on cleanliness at all places which are tourist destinations or famed tourist places, religious destinations or stay over’s. India’s image will be enhanced if the tourist destinations are clean. I appreciate the views of Ganesh jee and convey this message to the people of our country. We say, “Atithi devo bhava” and just imagine how we strive to keep our homes neat and clean when a guest is due to arrive. In a similar manner, the onus is on us to maintain our tourist destinations and pilgrim tourism sites neat and clean. I am very happy that a lot of news stories related to cleanliness keep appearing in the media space. From day one, I have thanked our media friends since they have brought many such small and good success stories before the people. I have come across a nice story in the newspaper and I would like to narrate it with the fellow citizens. 
Dileep Singh Malviya is an elderly artisan from Bhojpura village in Sehore district of Madhya Pradesh. He is a mason by profession to earn his livelihood. He did something so different that the newspapers printed his story. And when it came to my notice, I wanted to share this story with you. Hailing from a small village, Dileep Singh Malviya decided that if anyone provides materials for toilet in the village, he will render his labour services free of cost. And hats off to him, he has constructed 100 toilets in Bhojpura village so far taking it as a divine cause and providing his labour services without charging a penny.  My heartfelt congratulations to Dileep Singh Malviya for his earnest efforts. Sometimes we hear disappointing news about our nation. But there are thousands of people like Dileep Singh who are doing something good for the nation on their own. This is the power of the nation. This is the hope of the nation and these are the things which carry the nation forward and it is natural that we applaud Dileep Singh and his efforts in Mann ki Baat.
Due to tireless efforts of many people the nation is making rapid progress. 125 crores Indians are not only marching together but they are taking the country forward too. Better education, best talent and new opportunities of employment are being created. Be it providing insurance cover to citizens or providing them banking facilities, be it the ‘Ease of Doing Business’ in the world horizon or making facilities available for new businesses, we have done it all.  People from normal backgrounds who could not step inside banks can now avail loan facilities from the “Mudra Yojana.”
Every Indian is proud to know how the world is accepting and getting attracted towards Yoga. When the world celebrated “International Yoga Diwas” and the entire world got associated with it, we became proud of our country. Such emotions arise when we see the enormity of our nation.  No one can forget the story of Krishna and Yashoda where he opened his mouth and the mother was able to see the entire universe, and then only his power could be realized. The Yoga incident was a similar reminder.
The concept of cleanliness is being echoed in every household. The participation of citizens is also increasing. Many villages receive an electric pole after so many years of Independence. Those of us who live in cities and are so accustomed to using electricity that we don’t  realize the extent of happiness and excitement when darkness is removed from our lives. The power department of the state and Indian government were functional earlier as well but from the day 1000 day target to provide electricity to every village has been set, we get news everyday that  power supply is available in some or the other village and the happiness of the inhabitants’ knows no bounds. The media has not discussed this topic. But I am sure that media will definitely reach such villages and will inform the nation about the happiness and excitement of the people there.
The biggest achievement of this task is that the government officials involved in this task will have immense satisfaction that they have done something which will bring about such a big change in the lives of the people and the village itself. Be it the farmers, poor, young or women, should such things reach them or not? Such news should reach them not to highlight any government’s achievement, but to make them aware of their rights. They should not let go if it is their right. People should get information in order to avail their rights. We should all make efforts that right information, good information and information useful to the common man should reach as many people as possible. This is also a kind of service. I too have tried to do this work from my end. I cannot do everything alone by myself. But if I am saying then I should at least do something. Even a common man can download the Narendra Modi App and get connected to me. And I can share these small things with you through the app. And it is a matter of happiness for me that people share all the things with me. You too get connected with this initiative, we have to reach 125 crore Indians. How will I reach without your help? Come, let us collectively do such things of interest for the common man in their language and inspire them to avail things which are their rights.
My dear young friends, I had some preliminary discussions about “Start-up India, Stand-up India” in my speech on 15th August from the Red Fort. After that all government departments started discussing it. Can India become a “Start-up Capital’? Can our states work together for new Start-ups for youth, and encourage innovations with start-ups, be it in the manufacturing sector, service sector or agriculture. Everything should be new, new ways and new thinking - after all the world does not move ahead without innovation. “Start-up India, Stand-up India” brings in a huge opportunity for the young generation. My dear young friends, the government will launch the entire action plan for “Start-up India, Stand-up India on 16th January. What it will be, how it will be and why it will be? You will be presented with a structure. In this program all the IIT’s, IIM’s, Central Universities, NIT’s, wherever there is young generation, they will be brought together via live connectivity.
There is an established thinking regarding the Start-ups that they are meant only for the digital world or the IT profession. This is not true at all; we need to modify it according to the needs of India. For example, when a poor person works somewhere as a labourer and there is a lot of physical effort involved but if a young man innovates something which can reduce the physical effort and help the labourer- I will call it as a Start-up. I will ask the bank to help such an individual and I will tell him to move ahead with courage. You will get the Market. Similarly is the intellectual wealth limited to a few selected cities or what? This thinking is wrong. The Indian youth all over the country has talent, all they need is opportunities. This “Start-up India, Stand-up India” should not be limited to a few cities only. It should spread to every corner of India. And I will request the state governments to take this forward. I will definitely interact with you on 16th January and will discuss this in detail. Your suggestions are always welcome.   
Dear young friends, 12th January is the birth anniversary of Swami Vivekananda. There are thousands like me who draw inspiration from him. Since 1995, 12th January, the birth Anniversary of Vivekananda is celebrated as the National Youth Festival. This year it will be organized from 12-16th January in Raipur district of Chhattisgarh. This is a theme based event and I have got the information that this time they have a very good theme and that is “Indian Youth on Development Skill and Harmony”. I have been told that 10,000 young people will gather from all over India. A mini-India will be created there. They will share dreams together.  A feeling of determination will be experienced. Can you give me suggestions regarding this youth festival? I would request the youth to send me their suggestions directly on the “Narendra Modi App”. I want to gain an insight into your understanding. And that it gets reflected in the Youth Festival, for that I will give the government reasonable suggestions and information. So I will wait dear friends for your suggestions on the youth festival on the “Narendra Modi App”.
Dilip Chauhan, from Ahmedabad, Gujarat, who is a visually challenged teacher, celebrated ‘Accessible India Day’ in his school. He called me up to express his feelings:
“Sir, we celebrated Accessible India Campaign in our school. I am a visually challenged teacher and I addressed 2000 children on the issue of disability and how we can spread awareness and help differently-abled people. And the students’ response was fantastic, we enjoyed in the school and the students were inspired and motivated to help the disabled people in the society. I think it was a great initiative by you.”
Dilip ji, thank you very much. You are yourself working in this field. You understand everything and you must have faced a lot of difficulties too. Sometimes when we meet someone with different ability in the society then a lot of things come to our mind. We express our perception of him based on our thinking. There are some people who lose a limb or body part in an accident. Some people are born with some defects. And for these people different terms are used and a lot of thought goes on behind the usage of these terms. All the time people feel that this kind of identification does not sound nice and respectable. At some point we heard handicapped, then it was disabled and somewhere it is specially-abled, so many terms have been used. It is true that words have their own significance. This year when the government of India started the ‘Sugamya India’ programme, I was supposed to attend it, but could not make it, because of severe floods in Chennai and other areas of Tamil Nadu. However, since I had to attend that program some thoughts kept coming in my mind. That time, I thought that we call or know those people as handicapped since they are lacking in some ways in terms of their body structure or whose organs do not function properly. However, at times when we interact with them, we realize that we see only the deficits with our eyes but God has certainly bestowed them with some extra powers. God has bestowed upon them some different power which we cannot see with our eyes, but it is only when we see them working do we realize their talent. We think O Great! Look how he works. So I thought that upon looking at them with our eyes we feel that they are handicapped, but experiences tell us that they have some extra power. So I thought why not use the term ‘Divyang’ instead of ‘viklang’ in our country. They are those people who have one or more such organs which have divinity, where divine power flows which we normal bodied people do not have. I like this term. My dear countrymen can we make it a habit to use the word ‘Divyang’ and make it popular. I hope that you will take this forward.
That day we started the ‘Sugamya Bharat’ campaign. Under this campaign we will improve both the physical and virtual infrastructure and make it accessible for the ‘Divyang’ people. Be it schools, hospitals, government offices, bus depots, railway stations, everywhere ramps, accessible parking, accessible lifts, Braille, many amenities will be made available. To make things Sugamya - we need innovation, we need technology, we need systems and we also need empathy from people. We have taken the initiative. We are receiving public participation too. People like it. You too can join in the manner you deem fit.
My dear countrymen, the government schemes will continue exist and run, but it is necessary that these schemes always remain operational. The schemes should be operational till the last mile individual has benefitted from them. They should not have a dead existence in government files. After all, these schemes are meant for common man, the poor people. In the past few days the government has made an effort to ensure that the benefits of schemes reach out to the rightful owners. In our country, we give subsidy for the gas cylinders. Crores of rupees were spent on it but we did not know if it reached the right people or not, if this subsidy reached people on time or not? The Government has made some changes in the scheme. The government undertook the largest ‘Direct Benefit Transfer Scheme’ to provide subsidy directly in the bank accounts of the beneficiaries with the help of ‘Jan Dhan Account’ or ‘Aadhar Card’ etc. I am happy to share with the countrymen that this scheme has earned a place in Guinness Book of World Records as the largest Direct Benefit Transfer Scheme which has been implemented successfully. This scheme is known as ‘Pahal’ and this experiment has been very successful. Till November end, around 15 crore LPG customers have become its beneficiaries. The government money is being directly transferred to the accounts of 15 crore beneficiaries. No middlemen nor any recommendation, nor any possibility of corruption. On one hand was the Aadhar Card Scheme, and on the other was the Jan Dhan Account. Thirdly the state and Indian government compiled the lists of beneficiaries. That was connected to account and Aadhar. This work is still in progress. Nowadays, even the MNREGA scheme, which provides employment opportunities in villages, is being connected to it. There were lots of complaints about this scheme. In many places the wages of the labourers is now being directly transferred into their accounts. There were complaints about student scholarships too; they too are being transferred into their accounts. This has been started and will be gradually taken forward. Till now around 40,000 crore rupees are directly reaching the beneficiaries through various schemes. According to my rough estimate, around 35-40 schemes are now under ‘Direct Benefit Transfer.’
My dear countrymen, 26th January is the golden moment in the life of Indian democracy. This is a beautiful co-incidence that Baba Saheb Ambedkar, the maker of the Indian Constitution, his 125th birth anniversary will be celebrated this year.  We organized a two day special discussion on the constitution and it was a very good experience.  All the parties and all the members deliberated on the sanctity of the constitution, its importance to understand the true interpretation of the constitution. It was an excellent discussion. We should take this thing forward. Can Republic Day be an opportunity to connect the masses with the system? Our constitution grants us several rights and there are many discussions on it and it should be so and it is equally important. But constitution equally emphasizes on duty also. But it is seen that duties are hardly discussed. At the most, whenever there are elections, then we see advertisement all around us, they write on the walls and hoardings are put to tell that to vote is our sacred duty. There is a lot of talk about duties during elections, but why not discuss our duties in general life too. This year when we are celebrating the 125th birth anniversary of Babasaheb Ambedkar then can we make 26th January a medium to organize debates, poetry, slogan competition regarding duties in our own schools, colleges, villages, cities and various organizations and societies. If 125 crore Indians take dutiful steps one after the other, they can make history. But at least let’s start with discussions. I have an idea – Send me an essay or poem before 26th January about duty in Hindi or English or your native language. Can you send me? I want to know your views. Send them on my portal ‘My Gov”. I would like to know what my young generation thinks about their duties.
I want to give a small suggestion. On 26th January we celebrate Republic Day. Can we citizens and school and college students take up the initiative of cleaning the statue of any great men installed in our city, of cleaning the premises, we can do best of cleanliness and best of decoration on the occasion of 26th January. And I am not saying this on government lines. We become so emotional about getting the statues of great men erected but become equally complacent when it comes to maintaining them. As a society, as a nation can we make it a natural tendency to respect the statues of our great men? On this 26th January let us make an effort that we will respect such great men and keep the premises clean. But this should be done by the citizens willfully.
Dear Countrymen, greetings to you for a Happy New Year 2016. Thank You Very Much!
#DELIMITER#
25 12 2015, Afghanistan
Inauguration of new parliament building in afghanistan
Your Excellency President Ghani 
Your Excellency, Chief Executive Dr. Abdulla 
Honorable Speaker of Wolesi Jirga and the Chairman of Meshraon Jirga, 
Distinguished Members of both Houses
Eight centuries ago, a famous son of Balkh Province, one of the greatest poets in human history, Jalaluddin Rumi, wrote, "Raise your words, not your voice. It is rain that gives flowers, not thunder”.
This is the wisdom of this magnificent land and a great nation.
A land where legends are born – of poetry and beauty, of valour and honour, of pride and generosity, of the warmest embrace of friendship and the strongest resistance for freedom.
And, in this century, the great Afghan people have waged an epic struggle of courage and resolve to shape their future with vote and debate, not gun and violence.
A country with an abiding faith in the tradition of Jirga has chosen the path of democracy. And, it has done it against challenges that would have defeated a lesser people.
It is a tribute to the countless, nameless Afghans who laid down their lives and sacrificed their future.
To the leadership of former President Hamid Karzai Saheb,
who led the nation with wisdom and determination from the dark days of despair to a future of hope. 
To President Ghani and CEO Dr. Abdullah for their vision and statesmanship that can only come from great patriots. 
To you, Members of Parliament, for braving violence to take your seat in this House in trust of your people. 
Honourable Members, 
So, I stand here, on behalf of 1.25 billion friends in India, in admiration for your achievements, in gratitude for your friendship and in solidarity for your future. 
And, today, I am humbled and honoured to join President Ghani and all the Members of the Afghan Parliament to dedicate this new abode of democracy to the Afghan nation. 
We could not have chosen a more special day than the birthday of one of the tallest leaders of our time, former Prime Minister and Bharat Ratna Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayeeji. Eleven years ago, he dreamt of this project in partnership with Karzai Saheb. 
And, we are deeply touched that you have chosen to name one of the wings in this building the Atal Block.
This Parliament House brings together our two nations through the vision of our leaders, the labour of our people and the stones of our lands. 
And, the Atal Block unites us in spirit, because Atal means hero in Pashto and in Hindi it means to be firm. It captures the spirit of Afghanistan and of our friendship. 
This Parliament Complex is a small tribute to your progress as a nation and a democracy. And, it will stand as an enduring symbol of the ties of emotions and values, of affection and aspirations that bind us in a special relationship. 
Honourable Members, 
Our ties are as ancient as history. 
Over the mighty Hindu Kush and through the forbidding Khyber Pass, monks, merchants and monarchs have linked us through knowledge, culture, religion,commerce and kingdoms. 
In the shifting contours of history, there were times we have been one. There were times we saw wars. But, through the ages, we have always enriched one another. 
In the timeless Buddhist symbols of Aynak and Bamian and in the majestic monuments of Delhi, in our culture and art, in language and literature, food and festivals, we see the imprint of our timeless relations. 
We owe to ancient Afghanistan the gift of one of the great characters of Mahabharata, Gandhari. 
In the achievements of Mauryan Empire or Shershah Suri, we see connectivity that we now aspire to rebuild.
The words of poet Ahmed Shah Durrani may have expressed the longing of an Afghan King in Delhi, I forget the throne of Delhi, when I remember the mountain tops of my Afghan land. 
But, in the heart of every Indian and Afghan, there is boundless love for each other. We love each other’s culture and cinema, music and poetry, food and festivals. And, now we admire each other’s cricket. 
We are delighted that the Afghan National Cricket Team has found its home ground near Delhi and is practicing for next year’s World Cup. And, i congratulatethe Afghan Under 19 team that just beat Zimbabwe in its first home series. 
We are just as proud that Afghans see India as a natural destination for education, health or a family home. 
Indians remember the support of Afghans for our freedom struggle; the contribution of Khan Abdul Gaffar Khan, revered as Frontier Gandhi; and, the important footnote of that history, when, exactly hundred years ago, the first Indian Government-in-Exile was formed in Kabul by Maharaja Mahendra Pratap and Maulana Barkatullah. 
King Amanullah once told the Maharaja that so long as India was not free, Afghanistan was not free in the right sense. 
Honourable Members, 
This is the spirit of brotherhood between us. 
And, when you began a new journey in a new century,we were proud to stand with you and walk with you. 
Our partnership has helped rural communities get schools, minor irrigation, health centres, welfare for children and opportunities for women. 
Together, we have built roads that have brought regions closer; 
power transmission lines and power stations that light up Afghan homes; 
satellite links that bring education, medical advice and communication to Afghan people. 
And, we are helping the security forces become more mobile. 
The institutions we are establishing together are helping rebuild agriculture and mining in Afghanistan, and make advanced medical care available in Kabul. 
Nothing is more important for a nation than its human resources. So, we are pleased that our scholarships and training programmes are empowering Afghan youth with modern education and professional skills; Afghan government with resources to develop their country; and, the Afghan Security Forces with the capacity to secure their nation. 
Power and water will flow out of Salma Dam soon. The Stor Palace will again stand as a symbol of your priceless heritage. Our scheme of 1000 scholarships every year for Afghan students in India will continue. We are pleased with the response to our special scholarship scheme in agriculture science. 
Today, I announce 500 scholarships for the children of the martyrs of Afghan security forces. 
As we have stood with you in our efforts to rebuild your country, you have guarded and protected our people as your own. We have faced daily threats, but we feel secure in your midst.
To every Afghan, who has risked or lost his life so that his Indian guest is safe, I convey the eternal gratefulness of India. 
To Indian diplomats, officers, engineers and doctors, who serve here with pride, to the families of our Indian martyrs, I express the gratitude of Indians and Afghans. 
There are some who did not want us to be here. There were those who saw sinister designs in our presence here. There are others who were uneasy at the strength of our partnership. Some even tried to discourage us. 
But, we are here because you have faith in us. You never doubted the sincerity of our commitment and the strength of our friendship. And, you have seen the fruits of our partnership. 
You have judged us by what you see, not what others tell you, including about the mysterious Indian consulates. 
You know that India is here to contribute not to compete; to lay the foundations of future, not light the flame of conflict; to rebuild lives, not destroy a nation. 
You know, as we do, that Indians and Afghans have always stood for each other, never against another. 
You have been at the crossroads of history. And, your history tells us that you will never let yourself become a theatre of competition; or serve the designs of others. 
For you live by the creed extolled by poet Kushal Khan Khattak that Nation's honor and nation's fame on life they have a prior claim. 
So, with your faith and at your pace, India will continue to build Afghan capacity for governance, security and development, so that you can build a future that Afghans so richly deserve. 
We will do this from the responsibility that comes from our friendship. But, we also do this with a commitment to peace and stability in our region. 
We know that Afghanistan’s success will require the cooperation and support of each of its neighbours. And, all of us in the region - India, Pakistan, Iran and others - must unite, in trust and cooperation, behind this common purpose and in recognition of our common destiny. 
When Afghanistan becomes a haven of peace and a hub for the flow of ideas, commerce, energy and investments in the region, we will all prosper together. 
That is why we are working to improve your connectivity by land and sea, including through Chahbahar in Iran. 
That is why I hope that Pakistan will become a bridge between South Asia and Afghanistan and beyond. 
I hope that the day will come soon when energy from Central Asia will power prosperity in our region; when a Kabuliwala can once again come across easily to win Indian hearts; when we in India can relish the wonderful fruits of Afghanistan; when Afghans do not have to pay an enormous price to buy their favourite products from India. 
For this has always been the course of this region’s history. And, it must be the path to its future. 
But, brave and tireless as the Afghans are in defending their nations, Afghanistan will succeed only when terrorism no longer flows across the border; when nurseries and sanctuaries of terrorism are shut; and, their patrons are no longer in business. 
Terror and violence cannot be the instrument to shape Afghanistan’s future or dictate the choices Afghans make..
For, the fire that is lit in Afghanistan, can never be contained, within these boundaries. 
Afghans have the wisdom to seek peace with neighbours, but also the courage to defend their freedom. 
And, Afghans of all persuasions must have the right to seek peace among themselves. 
Too much blood has flown down Kabul River. Too many tragedies have darkened the mountain slopes. Too many dreams have burnt in the fire of a senseless conflict. 
You can be Pushtoons, Uzbeks, Tajiks, Hazaras. You can be Muslims, Hindus and Sikhs. 
But, you are proud Afghans who can come together as one nation and one people. 
You may have fought in the name of religion; or in the cause of identity. 
But, it is now time for Afghans to come together in peace. 
As a wise Afghan said, A tree with a bitter seed, Fed with butter and sugar, Will still bear a bitter fruit. 
You have a glorious tradition of pluralism and respect for diversity and beliefs. 
Those waging war from outside must seek a path to this building and this hall. Those seeking territory through gun must seek power through ballot. Those who have destroyed homes must now rebuild their nation. For, this is your land and these are your people. 
And, it must be on your terms, on your genius, through your own process and your own spirit of brotherhood. 
Not driven by the calculations or ambitions of others. 
And, the future you build in peace and through dialogue must preserve the hard-won progress of the last decade and half. It must have a place for every Afghan. It must have space for everyone’s aspiration. And, it must be a nation, where every citizen is secure of her rights and confident about her future. 
And, as Afghans take responsibility for their future, the world must stand with them in solidarity and support. 
We must do that for the soldier from a foreign land who laid down his life in an Afghan village that he had never heard of and for a people he had never known; and, for the enormous sacrifices that Afghans have made for a life that others take for granted. 
We must support Afghanistan without time lines because the new clouds of extremism and terrorism are rising, even as the old ones continue to darken our skies; and, because Afghans are not only fighting for their future, but are standing up for all of us and a safer world.
The world will be a better place when we can experience the real wealth of Afghan people in their diversity and rich heritage. 
It is time for all Afghans, everyone in the region and the rest of the world to come together. 
The sacrifices must not go in vain. 
The flame of hope should not die. 
No girl that steps into the world should slip into darkness of denied opportunities. 
No son should face the choice of gun or refuge in a distant land. 
No mother should fear bringing a child into this world. 
No leader should lose a brother because he spoke for Afghan freedom to choose friends. 
No one kneeling in prayer in a mosque should be killed in the name of religion. 
No elder should look back on his youth wasted in conflict, and see the same future for his grandchild. 
Every youth in Afghanistan should see a future in which IT stands for information technology, not international terrorism. 
For, the promise and the opportunities of the 21st century belong to Afghan youth as much as anyone else in the world. 
For India, this is a deeply held commitment. 
Your suffering is our pain. 
Your dreams are our duty. 
Your strength is our belief. 
Your courage is our inspiration. Above all, your friendship is our honour. 
And, as Hindi cinema’s most famous Pathan character, Sher Khan in Zanjeer sang, 
Yaari hai iman mera, Yaar meri zindangi. Friendship is my faith, the friend is my life. 
This is the creed of Afghans and Indians. 
I am confident that Hope will return to your homes, Laughter in your schools, Life in your streets, Prosperity in your cities, unity in your society and peace in your nation. 
And, at every step of your journey, India will be with you. 
Thank you. Thank you again for this great honour and privilege. 
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
25 12 2015, Russia
Joint Press with russian president
Your Excellency President Vladimir Putin, 
Members the Media, 
Let me begin by expressing my deepest condolences on the loss of lives in the terrorist attack on a civilian Russian aircraft and in the unfortunate downing of the military jet in Syria. In this moment of grief and challenge, we stand in solidarity with the people of Russia. 
Mr. President, thank you for generous and warm hospitality. You are the architect of the India-Russia strategic partnership. And, in a changing world, your leadership has kept our relations on a steady course of progress and growth.
Mr. President, I have always had great respect and appreciation for our strategic partnership. It has been a source of strength and success for India in defence, development and diplomacy. And, there is genuine goodwill and mutual respect between our people. 
As I look to the future, I see Russia as a significant partner in India’s economic transformation and in shaping a balanced, stable, inclusive and a multi-polar world. 
We have had excellent conversations over the past two days and very productive outcomes. 
It has deepened my conviction that this relationship truly meets the test of a special and privileged strategic partnership. 
We have laid the foundation of the future character of this strategic partnership. 
The Inter-Governmental Agreement on manufacture of Kamov 226 helicopter in India is the first project for a major defence platform under the Make in India mission. It is rightly with our most important defence partner.
We have made progress on a number of other defence proposals. These would boost defence manufacturing in India and India's defence readiness with next generation equipment. 
The pace of our cooperation in nuclear energy is increasing. We are making progress on our plans for twelve Russian nuclear reactors at two sites. The agreement today will increase Indian manufacturing content in these reactors. It supports my mission of Make in India. I thank President Putin for his support. 
With one of the world’s largest reserves of hydrocarbons, Russia can be a critical source of energy security for India, especially because of our strategic partnership. With President Putin's support, we are enlarging Indian investments in Russian hydrocarbon sector. 
President Putin and I are moving creatively in expanding our economic relations. Following our last Summit, India has created a special notified zone to facilitate direct trade between the world’s largest uncut diamond exporter, Russia, and India, which processes 90% of the world’s uncut diamond. 
Second, we are working on logistics. Our Green Corridor project has taken off. The International North South Transit Corridor through Iran will significantly reduce transportation time and cost.
Third, we are moving forward on the India-Eurasian Economic Union Free Trade Agreement. This will also benefit us in Central Asia. 
Fourth, we are encouraging our private sector to connect with each other more. We have just had an excellent meeting of CEO Forum. The agreements and the announcements today give me confidence that we will see huge increase in investments and trade in both directions. 
President Putin and I have a high degree of convergence in our positions on global issues and a strong commitment to deepen our international cooperation. 
We have strong collaboration in the United Nations. Our membership of BRICS, East Asia Summit, G20 and now Shanghai Cooperation Organisation gives our partnership a global character. It is particularly important in the arc from Eurasia to Asia Pacific, including in Central Asia and Afghanistan. 
We are one in our belief that the world must unite and take concerted action on combating terrorism, without distinction and discrimination between terrorist groups and target countries. 
We agree that an early political settlement through dialogue in West Asia is essential for restoring stability and containing extremism in the region. 
Indeed, all nations must come together, with sensitivity to each other, to address the challenges of our times.
I am very pleased to have deepened my association with President Putin. Together, we have also given new direction and added more momentum and content to our strategic partnership. 
Just as I have had the pleasure of visiting Russia twice this year, I look forward to welcoming President Putin in India next year for the BRICS Summit as well as the Annual Summit. 
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
15 12 2015, India
Combined Commanders conference on INS vikramaditya
Raksha Mantri, Shri Manohar Parrikarji, 
The Chiefs of the Air Force, Army and Navy, 
Our commanders,
It is a great pleasure and privilege to join our military leaders again. I am delighted that we are meeting at a base outside Delhi. 
I am sure you can feel a difference, and not just because of Indian Navy’s hospitality. 
Kochi is at the head of the Indian Ocean and at the crossroads of our maritime history. 
India’s history has been influenced by the seas. And, the passage to our future prosperity and security also lies on this ocean. 
It also holds the key to the fortunes of the world. 
This aircraft carrier is the instrument of our maritime power and a symbol of our maritime responsibility. 
The Indian Armed Forces have always been known not just for the power they represent, but by the maturity and responsibility with which they wield it. 
They defend our seas and protect our borders. They keep our nation secure and our citizens safe. 
And, in calamity and conflicts, they do more than just bring relief and hope to our people. They lift the spirit of the nation and win the trust of the world. 
In Chennai, you battled the fury of rain and the river to save lives. In Nepal, you served with courage, humility and compassion. And, as in Nepal, in Yemen’s conflict, you held out your hand to every human in distress, not just fellow citizens. 
Our forces reflect our nation’s diversity and its unity. They embody the timeless culture of India and the finest tradition of our military. And, their success comes from the leadership that you provide. 
Today, I express our nation's gratitude to our military.
I pay homage to those who made the supreme sacrifice, in silence and service, so that India marches ahead. 
Our thoughts are with the soldiers keeping vigil on the harshest frontiers of the world; with their families that say uncertain farewells when they leave home; and, their loved ones who must sometimes bear their coffins.
I know how an officer, in the prime of his youth, feels when he does not make the next grade, not because he was not outstanding or was less deserving, but because the room above was small. 
So, to honour your service and uphold your welfare will always be our solemn duty. 
For this reason, we have moved with speed to implement the One Rank One Pension promise that had remained unfulfilled for decades. And, we will build the National War Memorial and Museum that you so richly deserve in the heart of our nation’s capital. 
We will also improve skills and opportunities for our ex-servicemen, so that when they leave the Service, they can still serve the nation with pride and dignity. 
I also pay tribute to our internal security forces. Their valour and sacrifices defeat terrorism in Jammu and Kashmir, reduce the violence of Left Wing Extremism and keep our Northeast more peaceful. 
I complement our negotiators for bringing new hope in the long standing Naga problem. 
India is at an exciting moment of change. There is a high tide of hope and optimism in the country. There is a new level of international confidence and interest in India. We have become the fastest growing major economy in the world. And, our economy is on a more stable path.
Our factories are humming with activity again. We are building the next generation infrastructure at a higher pace and with an eye to the future. Foreign Investments are rising sharply and so is India’s ranking as a place to do business in. 
Every citizen can see a future of opportunities and fulfilled basic needs with confidence. This is important for India’s prosperity, and also our security. 
In an inter-dependent world, India’s transformation is closely linked with our international partnerships. And, so is our security. 
So, there is new intensity and purpose in our foreign policy. In the East, we have strengthened our traditional partnerships with Japan, Korea and ASEAN. We have made new openings in the region, including with Australia, Mongolia and Pacific Islands. 
We have extended our reach in the Indian Ocean Region, and for the first time articulated a clear strategy for our maritime region. We have raised our engagement with Africa to a new level. 
We have retraced our ancient links to Central Asia. We have established closer relations and security cooperation in West Asia and Gulf, even as we have revived our close relations with Iran. 
Russia has always been a source of strength for us. It remains important for our future, too. 
With the United States, we have advanced our partnership in a comprehensive manner, including in defence. Our strategic partnerships in Europe have deepened. 
Across the world, India is seen not just as a new bright spot of the global economy. It is also seen as an anchor for regional and global peace, security and stability. 
And, as the world seeks to deal with rising threat of terrorism and radicalism, countries across all regions, including in the Islamic world, have reached out to seek cooperation with India. 
Above all, it is our neighbourhood that is most critical for our future and for our place in the world. 
But, ours is a difficult neighbourhood with the full spectrum of security challenges.
We see terrorism and ceasefire violations; reckless nuclear build up and threats; border transgressions; and, continuing military modernization and expansion. The shadow of West Asian instability is becoming longer. 
Beyond that, our region is marked by uncertain political transitions, weak institutions and internal conflicts. And, major powers have also increased their engagement in our land and maritime neighbourhood. 
From Maldives and Sri Lanka in the seas to Nepal and Bhutan in the mountains, we are working to safeguard our interests and our relationships. 
The Land Boundary Agreement has boosted our growing relationship and security cooperation with Bangladesh. 
We are engaging Pakistan to try and turn the course of history, bring an end to terrorism, build peaceful relations, advance cooperation and promote stability and prosperity in our region. 
There are many challenges and barriers on the path. But, the effort is worth it, because the peace dividends are huge and the future of our children is at stake. 
So, we will test their intentions to define the path ahead. For this, we have started a new NSA-level dialogue to bring security experts face to face with each other. 
But, we will never drop our guard on security and we will continue to judge progress on their commitments on terrorism. 
We remain committed to help the great Afghan people build a united, peaceful, prosperous and democratic nation.
We are also pursuing closer relations with China to harness the full potential of our economic partnership. We will aim to address outstanding issues, maintain stability on the border, and develop greater mutual understanding and trust in our overlapping neighbourhood. 
I believe that India and China can engage constructively across the complexity of their relationship as two self-assured and confident nations, aware of their interests and responsibilities. 
We will continue to strengthen our defence capabilities and infrastructure, engage our neighbours more closely and strengthen our regional and global partnerships, including in maritime security. 
In a world of rapid changes, India faces familiar threats and new ones. Our challenges cover land, sea and air at the same time. It includes the full range, from terrorism to conventional threat to a nuclear environment. 
Our responsibilities are no longer confined to our borders and coastlines. They extend to our interests and citizens, spread across a world of widespread and unpredictable risks. 
As our world gets transformed, the character of economies change and technology evolves, the nature of conflicts and the objectives of war will also change. 
We know that old rivalries can play out in new theatres such as space and cyber. And, new technologies offer us new ways to be more effective against both traditional and new challenges.
So, we in India must be ready for the present and prepare for the future. 
India is confident that our defence forces are prepared to deter and defeat any misadventure. 
Our strategic deterrence is robust and reliable, in accordance with our nuclear doctrine, and our political will is clear. 
We have speeded up the process of defence procurements. We have approved many long pending acquisitions. 
We are taking firm steps to address shortages and cater for replacements. 
We are advancing the pace of expansion of border infrastructure and improve the mobility of our forces and equipment. This includes the strategic railways to the border region. 
We are transforming defence manufacturing in India through radically new policies and initiatives. 
Our public sector is gearing up to the challenge. The private sector has responded with great enthusiasm. 
And, foreign defence companies are coming here with ambitious new proposals for Make in India, from fighter jets and helicopters to transport aircraft and UAVs; from avionics to advanced material. 
We can never call ourselves a secure nation and a strong military power unless we develop domestic capabilities. This will also reduce capital costs and inventories. In addition, it will be a huge catalyst for industry, employment and economic growth in India. 
We will soon reform our procurement policies and process. And, our offsets policy will become a strategic tool for improving our capabilities in defence technologies. Defence technology will now be a national endeavour that taps the potential of all institutions in our country. 
Armed Forces will be crucial to the success of Make in India Mission. I am encouraged by your localization plans, especially in the capital intensive Navy and Air Force. 
We want to see clear targets and goals on domestic acquisition; more clarity on specifications; and, greater involvement of our forces in innovation, design and development, especially from those who wield the weapons in the field. 
Above all, we look to our Armed Forces to prepare for the future. And, it cannot be achieved by doing more of the same, or preparing perspective plans based on outdated doctrines and disconnected from financial realities.
In the course of the past year, I have seen progress, but I also feel that our forces and our government need to do more to reform their beliefs, doctrines, objectives and strategies. We must define our aims and our instruments for the changing world. 
At a time when major powers are reducing their forces and rely more on technology, we are still constantly seeking to expand the size of our forces. 
Modernisation and expansion of forces at the same time is a difficult and unnecessary goal. 
We need forces that are agile, mobile and driven by technology, not just human valour. 
We need capabilities to win swift wars, for we will not have the luxury of long drawn battles. We must re-examine our assumptions that keep massive funds locked up in inventories. 
As our security horizons and responsibilities extend beyond our shores and borders, we must prepare our forces for range and mobility. 
We must fully incorporate the power of digital networks and space assets into our capabilities. Equally, we must be prepared to defend them, for they will be the first targets of our adversaries. 
And, networks must be seamless and integrated across agencies and forces, and are precise, clear and quick in response. 
We have been slow to reform the structures of our Armed Forces. We should shorten the tooth-to-tail ratio. 
And, we should promote jointness across every level of our Armed Forces. We wear different colours, but we serve the same cause and bear the same flag. Jointness at the top is a need that is long overdue. 
Senior military leaders must have experience of tri-service commands, experience in technology-driven environment and exposure to the full spectrum of challenges – from terrorism to strategic. 
We need military commanders who not only lead brilliantly in the field, but are also thought leaders who guide our forces and security systems into the future.
We should learn from the experience of the others, but we must frame our systems and commands on our own genius. Our National Defence University will be a reality soon. 
We also need reforms in senior defence management. It is sad that many defence reform measures proposed in the past have not been implemented. This is an area of priority for me.
We must also have a comprehensive strategy for external defence engagement, to develop our capabilities and fulfill our responsibilities to advance peace and stability, including in our extended maritime region. 
We have kept peace in the blue helmet of the UN. And, our forces can be messengers of peace and hope, for example, by taking medical ships to remote island nations, and building relations with other militaries. 
In conclusion, to transform our country, every institution must reform itself. Our nation will progress when we all move forward in step. 
And, we expect you to lead from the front in expenditure reforms or in clean energy and energy efficiency. 
As you reform, we will do our best to meet your needs and keep you prepared. 
As our economy grows, we will be able to secure ourselves better. 
In turn, India pursues its dreams in the comfort that it is secure in your hands. 
Our military leaders, 
This is a year of anniversaries of the end of two World Wars and our 1965 conflict. 
This is also a year when humanity has come together in the United Nations to combat poverty and climate change. 
In the memories of the great tragedies of the past and in our united efforts for a better world, we are reminded of the enduring human story of progress and peril. 
And, of the responsibilities that men and women in uniform bear. To serve the cause of peace. To become the sentinels of progress. 
I know that our forces live by that creed. For our nation, for our friends, and our world. 
And, you will help India rise to its promise and its place in the world. 
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
29 10 2015, 
India Africa Forum Summit
Your Majesties, Chairperson of the African Union, His Excellency Robert Mugabe Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Madam Dlamini-Zuma, Excellencies,
The fabric of this world is richer because of the 54 sovereign flags of Africa. Today, their brilliant colours have made Delhi the most special place in the world.
To the 41 Heads of State and Government and the other eminent leaders; to the hundreds of senior officials, business leaders and journalists from Africa, I say this: we are deeply, deeply honoured by your presence today.
To our visitors from the land where history began, humanity grew and new hope rises;
From the deserts of the north, where the glory of human civilization shines through the shifting sands of time; 
From the south, where the conscience of our age has been forged – from Mahatma Gandhi to Albert Luthuli to Nelson Mandela;
From the shores of Atlantic that has been at history’s tragic crossroads and now at the frontiers of many successes; From our neighbours on the resurgent east coast; From Africa’s heart, where Nature is generous and culture is rich; And, from the sparkling gems of island states; 
A very warm embrace of welcome and friendship from India. Today, it is not just a meeting of India and Africa. Today, the dreams of one-third of humanity have come together under one roof. Today, the heart beat of 1.25 billion Indians and 1.25 billion Africans are in rhythm. 
We are among the world’s oldest civilisations. We are each a vibrant mosaic of languages, religions and cultures. 
Our histories have intersected since ages. Once united by geography, we are now linked by the Indian Ocean. The currents of the mighty ocean have nurtured the ties of kinship, commerce, and culture through centuries. 
Generations of Indians and Africans have travelled to each other’s land in search of their destiny or by the force of circumstances. Either way, we have enriched each other and strengthened our ties. 
We have lived in the long shadow of colonialism. And, we have fought for our liberty and our dignity. We have struggled for opportunity, and also for justice, which, the African wisdom describes, is the prime condition of humanity. 
We have spoken in one voice in the world; and, we have formed a partnership for prosperity among ourselves. 
We have stood together under blue helmets to keep peace. And, we have fought together against hunger and disease. 
And, as we look to the future, there is something precious that unites us: it is our youth. 
Two-thirds of India and two-thirds of Africa is under the age of 35 years. And, if the future belongs to the youth, then this century is ours to shape and build.
Excellencies, Africa is already on that path. 
We are all familiar with Africa’s ancient achievements. Now, its modern strides are catching the attention of the world. 
The continent is more settled and stable. African nations are coming together to take responsibility for their development, peace and security. 
African struggles and sacrifices are upholding democracy, combating extremism and empowering women. Women now constitute around 20% of the elected Members of Parliament in Africa. 
To one who has played a role in that, President Sirleaf, I extend our best wishes on your birthday today. 
Africa’s economic growth has gathered momentum and has a more diversified base. African initiatives are replacing old fault lines with new bridges of regional economic integration. 
We see many successful examples of economic reforms, infrastructure development and sustainable use of resources. They are turning adrift economies into dynamic ones. 
Four hundred thousand new businesses were registered in Africa in 2013; and, mobile telephone now reaches 95% of the population in many places. 
Africa is now joining the global mainstream of innovation. The mobile banking of M-Pesa, the healthcare innovation of MedAfrica, or the agriculture innovation of AgriManagr and Kilimo Salama, are using mobile and digital technology to transform lives in Africa. 
We see strong measures that are radically improving healthcare, education and agriculture. Primary school enrolment in Africa now exceeds 90%. 
And, across its magnificent landscape, Africa is setting standards in wildlife conservation and eco-tourism. 
Africa’s sports, art and music delight the entire world. 
Yes, Africa, like the rest of the developing world, has its development challenges. And, like others in the world, it has its own concerns of security and stability, especially from terrorism and extremism. 
But, I have confidence in African leadership and the African people to rise to those challenges.
Excellencies, 
for the past six decades, so much of our independent journeys have been together. 
Now, so much of India’s development priorities and Africa’s lofty vision for its future are aligned. 
Today, Africa and India are two bright spots of hope and opportunities in the global economy. 
India is honoured to be a development partner for Africa. It is a partnership beyond strategic concerns and economic benefits. It is formed from the emotional bonds we share and the solidarity we feel for each other. 
In less than a decade, our trade has more than doubled to over 70 billion dollars. India is now a major source of business investments in Africa. Today, 34 African countries enjoy duty free access to the Indian market. 
African energy helps run the engine of the Indian economy; its resources are powering our industries; and, African prosperity offers growing market for Indian products. 
India has committed 7.4 billion dollars in concessional credit and 1.2 billion dollars in grant since the first India-Africa Summit in 2008. It is creating 100 capacity building institutions, and developing infrastructure, public transport, clean energy, irrigation, agriculture and manufacturing capacity across Africa. 
In the last three years alone, nearly 25,000 young Africans have been trained and educated in India. They are the 25,000 new links between us.
Excellencies, 
There are times when we have not done as well as you have wanted us to. There have been occasions when we have not been as attentive as we should be. There are commitments we have not fulfilled as quickly as we should have. 
But, you have always embraced India with warmth, and without judgement. You have rejoiced in our success, and taken pride in our achievements. And, you have stood for us in the world. 
This is the strength of our partnership and our friendship. 
And, as we travel on the road ahead, we will do so with the wisdom of our experience and the benefit of your guidance. 
We will raise the level of our support for your vision of a prosperous,integrated, and united Africa that is a major partner for the world. 
We will help connect Africa from Cairo to Cape Town, from Marakesh to Mombassa; help develop your infrastructure, power and irrigation; help add value to your resources in Africa; and, set up industrial and information technology parks. 
Excellencies, 
As the great Nigerian Nobel Laureate Wole Soyinka insisted, human entity remains the primary asset in overall development. 
Our approach is based on the same belief: that the best partnership is one that develops human capital and institutions; that equips and empowers a nation to have the freedom to make its own choices and shoulder the responsibility for its own progress. It also opens doors to opportunities for the youth. 
So, development of human capital in every walk of life will be at the heart of our partnership. We will open our doors more;we will expand tele-education; and we will continue to build institutions in Africa. 
The Egyptian Nobel Prize winning writer Naguib Mahfouz said, “Science brings people together with the light of its ideas…and prods us towards a better future.” 
There can be no better expression of the ability of science to unify people and advance progress. 
So, technology will be a strong foundation of our partnership. 
It will help develop Africa’s agriculture sector. Africa has 60% of the world’s arable land reserves, and just 10% of the global output. Agriculture in Africa can drive the continent’s march to prosperity, and also support global food security. 
India’s expertise in healthcare and affordable medicines can offer new hope in the fight against many diseases; and give a newborn a better chance to survive. We will also collaborate to develop Indian and African treasures of traditional knowledge and medicines. 
We will make available our space assets and technology. We will use the possibilities of digital technology to transform development, public services, governance, disaster response, resource management and quality of life. 
We will expand and extend the Pan Africa E-Network, conceived by late President APJ Abdul Kalam, which links 48 African countries to India and to each other. This will alsohelp set up your Pan Africa Virtual University. 
We will work to reduce digital divide within Africa and between Africa and rest of the world. 
We will cooperate for sustainable development of Blue Economy that will become important future drivers of our prosperity. 
For me, Blue Economy is part of a larger Blue Revolution to reclaim our blue skies and blue waters, as we move on the path of clean development.
Excellencies, 
When the sun sets, tens of millions of homes in India and Africa become dark. We want to light up lives of our people and power their future. 
But, we want to do it in a way that the snow on Kilimanjaro does not disappear, the glacier that feeds the River Ganges does not retreat and our islands are not doomed. 
No one has done less to contribute to global warming than India and Africa. No one can be more conscious of climate change than Indians and Africans. 
This is because we are the inheritors of Nature’s most precious gifts, and of traditions that respect them the most; and, our lives remain most connected to Mother Earth. 
We are each making enormous efforts with our modest resources to combat climate change. For India, 175 Gigawatts of additional renewable energy capacity by 2022 and reduction in emission intensity by 33-35% by 2030 are just two aspects of our efforts. 
We will also deepen India-Africa partnership on clean energy, sustainable habitats, public transport and climate resilient agriculture. 
But, it is also true that the excess of few cannot become the burden of many. So, when the world meets in Paris in December, we look to see a comprehensive and concrete outcome that is based on the well established principles in the UN Convention on Climate Change. We will all do our part for it. But, we also want to see a genuine global public partnership that makes clean energy affordable; provides finance and technology to developing countries to access it; and the means to adapt to the impact of climate change. 
I also invite you to join an alliance of solar-rich countries that I have proposed to launch in Paris on November 30 at the time of COP-21 meeting. Our goal is to make solar energy an integral part of our life and reach it to the most unconnected villages and communities. 
India and Africa seek also seek a global trading regime that serves our development goals and improves our trade prospects. 
When we meet at Nairobi Ministerial of the WTO in December, we must ensure that the Doha Development Agenda of 2001 is not closed without achieving these fundamental objectives. 
We should also achieve a permanent solution on public stockholding for food security and special safeguard mechanism in agriculture for the developing countries.
Excellencies, 
This is a milestone year when we are setting the agenda for our future and celebrating the 70th anniversary of the United Nations. The world is undergoing political, economic, technological and security transition on a scale and speed rarely seen in recent history. Yet our global institutions reflect the circumstances of the century that we left behind, not the one we are in today. 
These institutions have served us well, but unless they adjust to the changing world, they risk becoming irrelevant. We cannot say what will replace them in an uncertain future. 
But, we might have a more fragmented world that is less capable of dealing with the challenges of our era. That is why India advocates reforms in global institutions. 
This is a world of free nations and awakened aspirations. Our institutions cannot be representative of our world, if they do not give voice to Africa, with more than a quarter of UN members, or the world’s largest democracy with one-sixth of humanity. 
That is why India and Africa must speak in one voice for reforms of the United Nations, including its Security Council. 
Excellencies, 
Today, in many parts of the world, the light of a bright future flickers in the storm of violence and instability. When terror snuffs out life on the streets and beaches, and in malls and schools of Africa, we feel your pain as our own. And, we see the links that unite us against this threat. 
We also see that when our oceans are no longer safe for trade, we all suffer together. 
And, when nations are caught in conflict within, no one around remains untouched. 
And, we know that our cyber networks bring opportunities, but also carry huge risks. 
So, when it comes to security, distance no longer insulates us from each other. 
That is why we wish to deepen our cooperation in maritime security and hydrography, and countering terrorism and extremism; and, why we must have a UN Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism. 
We will also provide support for Africa Union’s peacekeeping efforts. And, we will train African peacekeepers here and in Africa. We must also have a stronger voice in decisions on UN Peacekeeping Missions. 
Excellencies, 
From connecting lives to collaborating for our prosperity, from keeping our people safe to advancing our global interests, the agenda of our partnership stretches across the vast territory of our linked aspirations. 
To add strength to our partnership, India will offer concessional credit of 10 billion U.S. dollars over the next five years. This will be in addition to our ongoing credit programme. 
We will also offer a grant assistance of 600 million U.S. dollars. This will include an India-Africa Development Fund of 100 million U.S. dollars and an India-Africa Health Fund of 10 million U.S. dollars. 
It will also include 50,000 scholarships in India over the next five years. And, it will support the expansion of the Pan Africa E-Network and institutions of skilling, training and learning across Africa.
Excellencies, 
If this century is going to be one in which all humans have a life of opportunity, equality and dignity; stand in peace with each other; and live in balance with nature, then India and Africa must rise together. 
We will work together: 
From the memory of our common struggles; and, the tide of our collective hopes; 
From the richness of our heritage; and, the commitment to our planet; 
From the pledge to our people; and, the faith in our future; 
From the generosity of the African saying that a small home can hold hundred friends; 
From the spirit of India’s ancient belief: सन्तः स्वयं परहिते निहिताभियोगाः that great souls are always taking the initiatives to do good to others; 
From the inspiration of Mandela’s call to live in a way that respects and enhances the freedom of others. 
Today, we pledge to walk together, with our steps in rhythm and our voices in harmony. 
This is not a new journey, nor a new beginning. But, this is a new promise of a great future for an ancient relationship. 
Your presence here today, Your Majesties and Excellencies, is the strongest proof of our resolve and our commitment. 
Thank you! Thank you very much!!
#DELIMITER#
25 10 2015, India
Mann ki baat
Namaskar to all my fellow citizens!
Once again I have the opportunity of connecting with you through Mann ki Baat. Today the fifth “one day” cricket match is being played between India and South Africa in Mumbai. This series has been named as the ‘Gandhi-Mandela’ series. It is at an interesting point with both teams having won 2 matches each. So the last game is significantly important. My best wishes to all the players.
Today I would like to congratulate the friends at the Kannur centre of Akashwani.  I started the Mann ki Baat and people started connecting with it. One of them was Shraddha Thamban from Kerala a grade 12 student. Kannur Centre invited her for a ceremony and a lot of feedback was received. It created an environment of belonging. Kannur centre appreciated the awareness of Shraddha and she was rewarded. The development at Kannur centre inspired me. I wish all the Akashwani centers pay attention to raise the level of awareness among the members and make them active in their region so that our aim of governance with public participation gets a boost. My heartfelt greetings and congratulations to the team at Kannur station of Akashwani centre for their efforts.
I would like to talk about Kerala again. The girl students from Saint Mary Upper primary School from Chittoor in Kerala have sent me a letter. This letter is special in many ways. Firstly, these girls have created an image of Mother India by thumb prints on a huge piece of cloth. They have sent me the image of mother India. Initially I was surprised to see why they created a map of India using thumb prints. But when I read their letter, I realized how beautifully a symbolic message was given. It is not as if these girls have tried to just awaken the Prime Minister alone. They are trying to create awareness among the people in their region and their mission is organ donation. They are organizing a public awareness campaign for organ donation. They have organized plays for creating an understanding about organ donation. Organ donation should become a habit as well as an instinct.  They have asked me in their letter to appeal to people about Organ Donation in Mann ki Baat. The octogenarian Vasantrao Sudke Guru ji from Maharashtra has been running a movement from a long time. He says that organ donation should be a celebrated as a festival. These days I get a lot of messages on phone calls also. Devesh from Delhi gas also sent me a similar message. ‘I am very happy with the government’s initiative on the organ donation and steps towards creating a policy on the same. The country really needs support in these things where people need to go out and help each other and the ambitious target of one per million organ donation is a very productive steps taken by the government.’
I feel that this topic is very important. The country needs more than 2.5 lakh kidneys, hearts and livers for donation per year. However in a country with 125 crore people; only 5000 transplants could take place. Each year about one lakh eyes are in need of a vision. And we are able to reach upto only 25,000 people who need it .It implies that we are able to provide eye transplant services to only one out of the four needy persons.  We should also know that if someone is killed in a road accident, then also the organs can be donated. There are some legal hassles involved. And efforts have been made to guide the states in this direction.
By reducing the paper work, some of the states have made a good effort in speeding up the process involved in organ donation. Today, I can say that Tamil Nadu today ranks first in the field of organ donation. Many social organizations and NGO’s are doing commendable job in this direction. National Organ and Tissue transplant Organization (NOTO) has been established to encourage organ transplant. A 24x7 helpline facility is also available. Its number is 1800 114 770. And there is a saying ‘Tain Tyakten Bhunjhita’ ("What is given by Him, allotted to you, you enjoy that"). The joy of sacrifice is beautifully described in this mantra ‘Tain Tyakten Bhunjhita’. In the past few days we saw on television that the wife of a poor hawker in Delhi received a transplant in Delhi’s G.B. Pant Hospital. This liver was brought from Lucknow by making special arrangements. The transplant was successful. A life was saved. Organ donation is the biggest donation. Let us all realize the mantra of ‘Tain Tyakten Bhunjhita’.
Dear countrymen, we recently celebrated the festival of Navratri and Vijayadashmi. And after some days we will celebrate Diwali too. We celebrated Eid and Ganesh Chaturthi too. But amongst all these another big festival is being organized which all our countrymen should be proud of. In the National Capital of Delhi an ‘India Africa Foreign Summit’ is being organized from 26th to 29th October. For the first time a program of this scale is being organized on the Indian soil. Leaders of 54 African countries and unions have been invited. This is the biggest conference of African countries outside Africa. India-Africa ties are deep. The African nations have a population equal to that of India. If both are combined together they make for a third of the world population. And it is said that lakhs of years ago it was all one landmass. Later from the Indian Ocean two parts got separated. There are a lot of similarities amongst us. The bio diversity of both the nations is similar. Our natural resources are similar. And almost 27 lakh Indians have settled in these nations from a long time. India shares a lot of economic, cultural and political ties with the African Nations. But India plays the largest role in training the youth of the African countries. More than 25,000 African youths have studied human resource development and capacity building in India. And many leaders from Africa have studied in India. So you can understand the depth of our relationship. And from that perspective this summit is very important. Generally when there is a summit, leaders of various countries meet. Similarly, in this summit the leaders will be meeting. We are making efforts that the people should also meet.
And this time, the Government of India, especially the HRD ministry has done something really commendable. An essay competition was organized among all the CBSE affiliated schools. A poetry competition was organized to increase their participation. Almost 1600 schools participated in the event. It included schools within and outside India. And thousands of children wrote on topics about strengthening the Indo Africa ties. On the other hand, a mobile exhibition called “Memories of Mahatma” starting from his birth place Porbandar and travelling through North is about to reach Delhi on 29th October. Lakhs of school children enjoyed this exhibition. The villagers also had a glimpse. People realized the importance of the role of Mahatma Gandhi in developing the ties of both India and Africa and also the effect of his personality on these nations. Some excellent creations were received in this competition. One of the creations drew my attention and I want to share it with you. It reflects the talent, the broad vision and the depth of thoughts of students from small cities.  Garima Gupta from Muzzafarnagar, UP writes beautifully and says-
The river in Africa is Nile and the name of the sea is Red,
The Continent is Huge and the Indian Diaspora Happy
Like the Indus Valley is recognition of India civilization
River Nile and Carthage are synonymous with African civilization
Gandhi ji started his revolution in Africa
He wove a spell and won everybody’s heart
Be it Johannesburg or Kingston, Zimbabwe or Chad
In each African nation, we can find our Aloo chat
To write, a thousand lines can be written     
But I want to mention that I love African jungles
The poem is very long, but I have read a few lines to you. Though it is an Indo – Africa summit but how this too can become an opportunity to connect people is clearly evident here. I heartily congratulate Garima, the students and more than 1600 schools who participated and HRD Ministry for this initiative.
Last time on 15th August I had proposed the Sansad Adarsh Gram Yojana. Since then, many parliamentarian friends have adopted it. They were deeply involved. Last month a workshop was organized in Bhopal. All the pradhans, collectors, parliamentarians of villages adopted under Adarsh Gram, the representatives of Indian government and state government, all had an in-depth discussion on this program. Many new and encouraging things came to our attention. I would like to bring to your attention a few things. Jharkhand, a huge state is primarily tribal.  Unfortunately whenever one talks of Jharkhand what comes to mind is Maoism, violence, guns and blood soaked land.  Many regions in the state have been ruined by these communist terrorists. But the MP from that place, a senior member who has also been our Deputy Speaker, Shri Karia Munda has dedicated his life for the tribals. He chose Parsi Gram Panchayat from Khunti district to be adopted for Adarsh Gram.  It is difficult for government officials to go to places ruled by the Maoists.  Even the doctors cannot visit those places. He himself started travelling to this village, to instill faith and give a new lease of life to governmental organizations. He encouraged the officials to visit. He tried to change the mood of despondency and create a mood to achieve something. A successful effort has been made in Parsi village to create awareness along with infrastructure and organizational development. I would like to congratulate our Honourable parliamentarian Sri Karia Munda ji for the same.
I got similar information from Andhra too. The MP from Andhra Sri Ashok Gajapati Raju became involved in this plan and chose Dwarapudi Gram Panchayat from Vijaynagram district for the same. Other arrangements are in progress, but he did something really innovative. He gave a task to the students in the village school. The new generation in the village is fortunate to be educated but the older generation is not literate. So he asked the students of a higher age group to educate the parents. So in the morning they are students and by evening they become educators. And so, nearly 550 adults were taught by these children and made literate. Just see, no budget, no circular, no special arrangements but just will power brought about such a big change. This is amply demonstrated by the Dwarapudi Gram Panchayat.
Similarly, another respectable parliamentarian Sri C. L Ruwala ji, he is an MP from Mizoram, our North East. He chose Khwalahilung village for Adarsh Gram and ran a special initiative. This village is famous for sugarcane production and a Kurtayi jaggery. Sri Ruwala ji started a Sugarcane Festival on 11th March. All the people from the region came together for it. Senior members from social public life, retired government officials from the region also participated. They put up an exhibition on increasing sugarcane production. They discussed how the village could be made the centre of economic activities and how it could market for its produce. I congratulate Ruwala ji for his efforts to make this village not only an Adarsh gram but self dependent village too.
My dear brothers and sisters, it is not possible that there be an episode of Mann ki Baat and we do not discuss cleanliness. Savita Rai from Mumbai has sent me a telephonic message - “each year on Diwali we clean our houses. This Diwali let us clean our environment along with our homes and maintain that cleanliness even after Diwali”. She has drawn attention to this issue. I want to remind you my dear countrymen that last year in our country, the media ran a special campaign and showed all the places where crackers were lying and told that it was not the right thing. This was an awareness campaign launched by the media. As a result of it, soon after Diwali a cleanliness drive got initiated all by itself. So what you are saying is true that our concern before and after the festival should be the same. And we should express this concern on every public platform. And today, I especially congratulate all the members of the Indian media fraternity.
This 2nd October, on Gandhi ji’s anniversary and also on the completion of one year of ‘Clean India Campaign’, I had the fortune of participating in the ‘Safaigiri Campaign’ of the India today group. They gave away the Clean India Awards and I could see several initiatives being carried out. Different people were working as ‘One Like, One Mission’. There are so many places in our country that have been kept so clean. All these things were brought to light and I offered my heartfelt appreciation to India Today group for their commendable efforts. Since the inception of the cleanliness drive I have seen that from Andhra and Telangana, ETV, Eanadu have participated whole heartedly and specially Sri Ramoji Rao who is very aged but beats any youth in his enthusiasm. He has made cleanliness his personal program, his mission. He has been promoting the cleanliness program through ETV for the past one year. The newspapers carry news about them and he has emphasized on positive news about cleanliness. He has been successful in bringing together around 51 lakh children from 55-56 thousand schools of Andhra and Telangana to this mission. Be it public places, stations, religious places, hospitals, parks or other places, he ran a cleanliness drive. All these news exhibit the power to realize the dream of a Clean India.
ABP news has started a program called ‘Ye Bharat Desh Hai Mera’. In this program they have shown how people have become aware towards cleanliness and through this they are trying to train people about keeping their surroundings clean. NDTV has started a campaign called ‘Banega Swachh India’. Dainik Jagaran has also encouraged this campaign, so has Zee TV and India TV also started ‘Mission Clean India’. Thousands of channels and newspapers in our country, I am unable to name them all due to time constraints, but they all have helped run this campaign. This is why, Savita Rai ji, the suggestion that you have given us; the whole nation has taken it upon them to do this work and taking it forward. The Governor of Meghalaya, Mr. Shanmuganthan, wrote me a letter and talked about a village in Meghalaya called Mavalyannong. He has written that from last many years, this village has set out on a mission for cleanliness and more or less every generation is completely dedicated towards this cause. He has also mentioned that a few years ago they also got the award for the ‘cleanest village’ of Asia. The idea of a far-flung village situated in the north-eastern region in Meghalaya, which has been particular about cleanliness since years, makes me extremely happy. This has become the habit and the culture of the village. This is what reinforces our belief that our nation will be clean one day, for sure. This will be possible because of the efforts of the people, and by the time we celebrate the 150th anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi, the 125 crore people of the country should be able to proudly proclaim that we have made India clean.
My dear countrymen, I said this from the Red Fort on the 15th of August that there are few places where corruption is deep rooted. When a poor man goes for an ordinary job, he faces so many problems to get a decent reference and has to go through a team of agents who take money from him in exchange for the position he is applying for. He loses money whether he gets the job or not. We keep hearing things like these and this is when I had an idea, why do we need to interview people for ordinary jobs. I have never heard of any psychologist in the world who can analyze a person completely in a 1-2 minute long interview. With this thought I decided to do away with the tradition of interviews for small positions.
My dear young friends, I feel very proud to tell you all that the government has completed all the formalities and now there will not be any interview for the non-gazetted posts of group ‘D’, group ‘C’, and group ‘B’ in the Central Government. This will come into effect from January 1st 2016. We will not interrupt the ongoing procedures now but from January 1st, 2016, this will come into play. So, let me congratulate all my young friends for the same.
We had, anyways, declared an important scheme in the last budget. In our country, gold has become a part of our social life. Gold is considered the medium of financial security. Gold is considered to be the solution for difficult times. This has been an age old tradition. I don’t believe that anyone can reduce this love for gold that we have developed but keeping gold as dead-money does not suit today’s generation. Gold can become our strength. It can become our financial strength. Gold can become the financial property of the nation and every Indian must contribute to this. I am happy that the promise that we made of introducing important schemes, we will do so around Diwali and Dhanteras when people buy specially buy gold. We have introduced a ‘Gold Monetization Scheme’. Under this scheme, you can deposit your gold in a bank and the bank will give you interest, same as you deposit your money and get interest from the bank.
Earlier, we used to keep our gold in the lockers and paid for the lockers ourselves. Now, when you keep your gold in the bank, the bank will give you money as interest. Now, tell me countrymen, can gold become a property or not?
Can gold be converted from dead-money to a live strength or not? This is exactly what we have to do and you must stand with me. Do not keep your gold in your homes. Avail dual benefits, its security and interest on the gold. You must avail this opportunity. Another thing is, in Sovereign Gold Bonds, you do not really get a physical gold in your hand. You get a sheet of paper and the value of that paper is equivalent to that of the amount of gold and the day you return that paper, you will get the amount that is equivalent to the value of gold on that particular day. Let us assume, you buy a gold bond worth Rs. 1000 and five years later you go to return that bond and at that time the rate of gold is Rs. 2500, you will receive an amount of Rs. 2500 in exchange of that bond. So, we are introducing this scheme now. Due to this scheme, we will not have to buy gold now. We will not have to secure our gold now. We will not have to worry about where to put the gold and no one will come to steal the papers. In the coming week, I will certainly put forward this scheme that guarantees security to the people of this country. I feel very glad to tell you that we are also introducing Gold Coin, a gold coin with Ashok Chakra. It has been around 70 years of independence but we are still using a foreign gold coin only or the Gold Bullion Bars, these are also used by the foreigners. Why should it not have the national emblem of our country? This is why we are introducing it in the market and it will be available for the citizens in the coming week, before Dhanteras - 5gm and 10gm of gold coins with Ashok Chakra are being introduced. Along with it a 20 gm Gold Gunion will also be available for the people. I have full faith that this new scheme will usher a new change in the financial development of the country and I will get your support in this.
My dear countrymen, 31st October is the birth anniversary of the Iron-Man of India, Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel. “Ek Bharat, Shreshtha Bharat.” A complete layout of India unfolds in front of us when we talk about Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel. This great man has contributed a lot in building the unity of India. He has proven his capabilities as the Iron-Man of India. We will certainly pay tribute to Sardar Sahab but along with that his dream of seeing India integrated, he made it possible geographically. But this mantra of unity should be a continuously present in our thoughts in our minds, behaviour and our expressions. India is full of diversities. Many sects, communities, languages, castes, attires, and it is this diversity that adds to its charm. If it was not for this diversity, we wouldn’t have been this proud of our country. This is why diversity is the mantra of unity. Peace, social harmony, unity, these are essential elements of a society. Since last many years, ‘Run for Unity’ programs have been organized in various parts of the country on the 31st of October. ‘Ekta ki Daud’ - I also had a chance to run in one of these earlier. I have heard this year also, this race is being planned at many places. People are excited to be preparing for this race. In the true sense ‘Ekta ki Daud’ is the true race for development. In other words, the guarantee for the race of development lies in the race of unity. Come…let us pay tribute to Sardar Sahab. Let us take forward the mantra of unity.
Dear brothers and sisters, you must all be busy in the preparations for Diwali, houses must be getting cleaned. You must be shopping for new things. The festival of Diwali is celebrated in various ways all over the country. I extend my good wishes to you on this pious festival. We also get to hear of a few accidents around the time of Diwali. Fire breaks out due to firecrackers or lamps. Especially children suffer a lot because of fire crackers. I will suggest all the parents to be careful along with enjoying Diwali and see to it that the kids should not get hurt or any untoward incident should not happen and we lose our child due to accidents. I know you will be careful about this and of course about keeping the environment clean.
My dear countrymen, I have to leave for a trip to Britain on the next day of Diwali. I am very excited about my Britain trip this time. There is a reason behind my excitement. A few weeks back I went to Mumbai to inaugurate a magnificent memorial of Dr. Baba Bhimrao Ambedkar near his ‘Chaitya Bhoomi’. Now, I am going to London to formally inaugurate the house where Babasaheb used to stay, which has now become the property of India, an inspiration for 125 crore countrymen. Be it a dalit, an underprivileged, a victim, a bereaved, or any Indian who is leading a difficult life. This house inspires us to believe in the fact that if one has a strong will power, we can overcome the difficulties to tread on the path of success, one can get educated and this is the very place where Babasaheb Ambedkar used to meditate. The Indian government and the government of different Indian states give scholarships to such promising students who go abroad to study and who belong to the dalit community, the tribal community or any other under privileged community. I believe that when these kids go to Britain to study, this memorial of Babasaheb will become a pilgrimage for them, it will become a source of inspiration. Whatever you learn in life, you must use it later for the nation and live for your nation, Babasaheb gave this message and even lived it himself.
This is why I am saying that I am very excited about my Britain trip this time. This issue has been lying entangled since many years, now it has become the property of 125 crore countrymen and if the name of Babasaheb Ambedkar is attached, you can imagine how happy it makes me.
I am going to get another opportunity in London, the unveiling of the statue of Lord Vishweshwara. Many years ago, what Lord Vishweshwara had done for democracy and empowerment of women can make for a very good subject to study in the world. The unveiling of the statue of Lord Vishweshwara on the land of London is in itself a perfect example of the fact that the great men of India were very far-sighted. Now you see, when such incidents are connected, how excited we get.
My dear countrymen, you are connected with us through “Mann ki Baat.” I keep getting your suggestions through telephone and mygov.in. Your letters are also discussed on Akashvani.  Government officials are called in and discussions are held. Some people write down their grievances, there are efforts to solve their problems as well. We should learn more than one language in a country like India. I am fortunate enough to have learned a few languages, but still there are so many languages that I could not learn. I am indebted to Akashvani because they broadcast this program of “Mann ki Baat” by 8 o’clock in every state in their regional languages. Even though a different voice is used but the thoughts are mine.
I will try to make it reach out to you in your language. We have formed a beautiful bond between us. Last time I had completed a year in power. This year we are entering a new year. A heartfelt congratulations to all my countrymen once again!
Jai Hind.
#DELIMITER#
23 10 2015, India
India Africa forum summit - journalists
A very warm welcome to all of you. Some of you have probably had the opportunity of visiting India before and for some probably it is the first time that you are visiting India. I hope that for your comfort you have been well looked after here. I know that there is an official programme but if you have any suggestion of what you would like to do here in addition to the programme that has been set up for you, that can be accommodated. I also want that your visit here is not only important in the context of the India-Africa Forum Summit but the very fact that it is a visit to India, it is important and there will be full efforts on the part of my Government. 
I feel that this India-Africa Forum Summit is very important from many points of view. Of course for India it is very important given that we are the host country, but this is the first summit where all the 54 countries of Africa have been invited and all the 54 countries are participating. In that sense the India-Africa Forum Summit is the biggest event of its sort and partnership at this scale. 
Till now as per the information that we have received, 40 countries will be represented at the Head of State, Head of Government level, the rest are being represented by senior Ministers. This time, in association with the India-Africa Forum Summit there is also the Conference of Trade Ministers because we would want that in the days and months and years to come the economic relations between India and Africa should be further strengthened. 
The India-Africa Forum Summits have had two summits earlier, in 2008 and 2011, and now this is the 3rd India-Africa Forum Summit taking place. Earlier the two summits were organised on the basis of the Banjul Formula, and in that sense very limited countries had come and participated. But this time we decided to in fact come out of this formula and ensure that there was participation from all countries of Africa. 
This I think is going to take relations between India and Africa to new heights. I think it is this partnership and this equality that is being given to all the countries. This is an initiative on our part and I think this is what makes this summit different from the two earlier versions. There are going to be meetings at various levels, at the top level. I think it is this partnership with all which is going to bring a new freshness in every corner of Africa. This new freshness is not just for Africa but also for India that this summit is going to bring new freshness in our relations. 
I have been told that of course you have come to India and you are going to have a week-long programme during which you will be taken to various parts of the country and you will be seeing for yourself the progress and development. But in addition to you there are 400 journalists who are coming to cover this event from Africa and they are coming on their own with their own means. I think this itself indicates the importance that is being attached to this summit. From the discussions that I have been having with everyone, this summit in fact is attracting the focus of the entire world and people are in fact looking at it with great importance and I see this as a very good sign. 
The relations between India and the countries of Africa, these relations and these bonds that we have, are not just political and economic but we also have a very rich cultural tradition. It is said that millions of years ago in fact the two parts of the Earth were one piece and it was only much later that they became two separate pieces of land, one was Asia and the other was Africa; and we have an Ocean which divides us. The west coast of India and the east coast of Africa in fact are linked by the sea. 
I hail from the west coast of India from the State of Gujarat. It was in fact the Gujaratis who started trade and commerce with Africa and maritime relations earlier on. Even today there are 270,000 Indians who live in Africa and many of them are Gujaratis. In fact I too have had my links with Africa not only when I was the Chief Minister of Gujarat but even before that. I have always had relations with the African continent and whenever guests came they always met me. I have always had very good relations with various personalities of Africa. So, from a personal point of view I have always had very close links with this region. 
In fact there are many similarities between India and Africa and together India and Africa we represent one third of the world’s population. The population of India equals in fact the population of the entire African continent. Africa in fact represents the youngest region in the world and India too is the youngest country. Perhaps when we look at the world today these are the only two places where 65 per cent of the population is below 35 years of age and I feel that this is a matter of great fortune for both Africa and for India. 
The bilateral trade between India and Africa has been growing very rapidly and in the past few years it has grown by eight to nine times. I feel that after this summit it is going to see another major jump. India also is a major investor in Africa today and this is especially so in the oil sector and this is giving a new dynamism to the African economy. 
Following the two previous India-Africa Forum Summits, India has given to the tune of 7.4 billion dollars of concessional credit and this has been used to enhance in the fields of infrastructure, agriculture, industry, energy and water. In more than 40 countries today there are more than 100 projects which are under implementation. 
In the same vein, India has invested 1.2 billion dollars in more than 100 institutes and this is contributing in a major way to human resource development. For me I think the point which makes me the most happy is that there is this partnership between India and Africa that is human resource development, the capacity building. And in the last few years we have had the good fortune of imparting education and training to around 25,000 African students and I think this is a matter of good fortune for India. Today in Africa many of the leaders who are now in power and in top position have had their education and training in India. 
I think between India and Africa there is another aspect that links us with many countries in Africa and that is solar power from which many African countries are benefiting. I think this is going to become a very strong community of nations and in the times to come the problem of climate change that the world is trying to counter and fight, we are going to be playing a very major role in mitigation and lessening the effects of climate change. 
I think both India and Africa can feel proud of the fact that today the world is facing the problem of climate change, of the concerns regarding global warming, I think both India and Africa have had a tradition and it is in their culture not to pollute or not to damage the environment, and we have perhaps sinned the less and contributed the minimum to this big problem to the world. I think this also is a common factor between India and Africa. 
I am convinced that during this summit and following the summit we are going to have very important decisions which will give both India and Africa a new sense of self confidence, our relations are going to become closer and deeper, and together I think we can lay the foundations of what we can contribute to the world. 
Once again a very warm welcome to you. I will also have the opportunity of greeting you during the summit once again. Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
13 7 2015, Tajikistan
Tajikistan visit
His Excellency President Rahmon, 
Members of the media, 
Let me start by expressing my deep appreciation and gratitude to President Rahmon and the people of Tajikistan for the warm welcome and hospitality. 
I am delighted to visit Tajikistan. It is a beautiful country. This is the last stop on my visit to the five Central Asian countries. But, we sometimes save the special one for the last.
We share deep historical, cultural and civilizational links. Tajikistan is nearest to India among all Central Asian countries. We are separated by a narrow corridor. Our linguistic links are the closest in Central Asia. 
Today, we have formed a deep bond on the basis of our shared aspirations for security and prosperity for our people, and peace and stability in our region. 
It is a great pleasure to meet President Rahmon. We met briefly in Ufa. His personal commitment and leadership is a source of great strength for our relationship. 
We discussed measures to tap the rich potential in trade and commerce and to encourage joint ventures and investments. We have tasked our Joint Commission to meet soon and finalise a concrete roadmap to expand our trade and economic ties. 
Agriculture is important to both our economies. I am delighted that President Rahmon and I will address a Workshop on advancing our cooperation in agriculture later today.
Connectivity is vital for realizing the full potential of trade and commerce between our countries. 
We agreed to promote the International North South Transport Corridor. Other connectivity initiatives such as our planned investment in Chahbahar Port in Iran and intention to join the Ashgabat agreement will help. 
But, I also hope that we can establish a direct link to India that would promote prosperity across the region. 
We agreed to further strengthen our defence cooperation. It is a strong pillar of our strategic partnership. 
We are both located in the proximity of the main source of terrorism. Combating terrorism and extremism has always been an important and productive area of cooperation. At a time of growing threat of terrorism, we have resolved to intensify our cooperation further. 
India and Tajikistan will also continue to support the aspirations of the Afghan people for a peaceful, stable and prosperous nation.
We will work closely in international forums, including the United Nations, where we already support each other’s initiatives. I conveyed appreciation for Tajikistan's continued support for India's candidature for permanent membership of a reformed UN Security Council. 
India's membership of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation adds a new dimension to our partnership. 
We are deeply grateful for the decision of the Government of Tajikistan and the authorities of Dushanbe to install a bust of Rabindranath Tagore in the city. 
It highlights the cultural and spiritual links between our two nations. The popularity of Tagore’s poetry in Tajikistan, is mirrored in the continued admiration of Bedil’s poetry in India. This is our shared heritage, of which we can truly be proud. 
I am delighted to release today the Hindi translation of Babujon Gaffurov’s masterwork on Tajik history. This would enable a much broader understanding of Tajik culture and history in India.
Finally, I thank President Rahmon and Tajikistan for the support in making the International Day of Yoga on June 21st a huge global success. 
I wish to thank President Rahmon once again for the warmth of his welcome, which reflects the love and affection that the people of Tajikistan have for the people of India. This is a sentiment shared fully by the people of India. 
I have extended an invitation to President Rahmon to visit India at an early date and look forward to receiving him in Delhi. 
Thank you very much.
#DELIMITER#
11 7 2015, Turkmenistan
Joint press statement in Turkmenistan
His Excellency Mr President, 
Members of the media, 
It is a great pleasure to visit Turkmenistan. I am also delighted to see Ashgabat. It stands on a once thriving trade route since ancient times. It is now a beautiful 'Ak Shaharim' or the White City. It reflects your great vision and the nation's prosperity. 
Mr. President, I am very grateful to you and the people of Turkmenistan for a very warm welcome and generous hospitality.
Our long standing and deep-rooted civilisational and cultural ties are well known. It has created a sense of familiarity and goodwill between our people. It is a strong foundation of close relations between our two countries. 
India attaches great importance to this relationship. There is enormous potential for cooperation between India, a nation of 1.25 billion people with a large and rapidly growing economy, and Turkmenistan, a nation rich in resources. 
As India deepens its relations with Central Asia, Turkmenistan will play a crucial role in it. 
We have shared interests in a peaceful and stable Afghanistan and Central Asia. We also have common purpose in combating terrorism and extremism in our region. 
Connecting South and Central Asia will open up new economic opportunities in our region and beyond. 
I thank Mr. President for sharing this vision and for his strong support to the relationship. 
The most significant initiative in our relationship is the TAPI Gas Pipeline. This could transform regional economic cooperation and bring prosperity along the route. We welcomed the agreements between the four countries for the pipeline. We underlined the need to implement the project quickly. 
I also proposed to President that we should explore multiple options, including the additional possibility of land-sea route through Iran. 
I conveyed our interest in long term investment in the energy sector in Turkmenistan. We welcome the decision by ONGC Videsh Limited to open an office in Ashgabat. 
We had a very positive discussion on India's interest in investment in downstream industries, including petrochemicals and fertilizer. The Memorandum of Understanding in the fertilizer sector will enable long term arrangements for supply of fertilizers from here to India. 
Connectivity is an area of priority for both countries. If we use the Iran route, Ashgabat is the first capital we would reach in Central Asia. 
We are grateful for Turkmenistan’s support to India joining the Ashgabat Agreement on trade and transit. I have also proposed that Turkmenistan becomes a member of the International North South Transport Corridor. 
Together with the Kazakhstan-Turkmenistan-Iran rail link, and India's proposed investment in Chahbahar Port in Iran, these initiatives will strengthen connectivity between our countries. 
Training and human resource development is an important area of cooperation. India will enhance its training scholarship programme. I welcome the upgrading of the Turkmen India Industrial Training Institute in Ashgabat. 
The agreements on sports and tourism will deepen the contacts between our people. 
Later today, I will have the pleasure of unveiling the bust of Mahatma Gandhi. It will be a reminder of our shared commitment to the cause of a peaceful, inclusive and a just world. 
I am looking forward to the inauguration of the Centre of Yoga and Traditional Medicines. It is a tribute to our cultural links. It also gives us opportunities to revive our very old tradition of fruitful cooperation in traditional medicines. I also proposed to him that Ashgabat could be developed as an International Centre for Holistic Healthcare. I offered full support for it. 
The defence agreement is a reflection of our shared interest in closer security cooperation, including in combating terrorism. 
I am grateful to President and the people of Turkmenistan for the support in making the International Day of Yoga on June 21 a huge global success. 
I congratulated the President on the 20th anniversary of the adoption of Permanent Neutrality by Turkmenistan. India acknowledges the contributions of this policy to peace and stability in Turkmenistan and the wider region. 
Again, Mr. President, this has been a short but very productive visit. I am confident that our relationship will grow in strength in the coming years. 
I look forward to receiving you in India, Mr. President, in the near future. 
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
8 7 2015, kazakhstan
Joint press statement
His Excellency President Nursultan Nazarbayev, 
Members of the media, 
İ am delighted to visit this beautiful country. It has been a short but a memorable and rewarding visit. 
I would like to express my deep gratitude to President Nazarbayev and the people of Kazakhstan for the exceptional welcome and hospitality. 
Excellency, I congratulate you once again on your 75th birthday. I wish you great health and a long life of service for your country and humanity. 
Mr. President, your leadership is deeply admired. You have put Kazakhstan on the path of rapid progress. You have also played a stellar role in regional and global affairs. 
I congratulate the people of Kazakhstan on the ocassion of 550th anniversary of the Kazakh Khanate and 20th anniversary of the Constitution of Kazakhstan.
I also learnt that this beautiful new capital is still celebrating Astana Day. 
So, this is really a good time to visit Kazakhstan. 
Last evening I spoke about my vision for India's relations with Central Asia. Kazakhstan will play a critical role in advancing this vision. 
We greatly value our relationship with Kazakhstan. We have enormous synergies of markets, resources and skills for a strong bilateral relationship. We discovered remarkable convergence in our economic policies, approaches and strategies in a number of areas. 
We have shared perspectives on many international issues, including regional peace, connectivity and integration; reforms in the United Nations; and, combating terrorism. 
Kazakhstan is our biggest economic partner in the region. But, our relations are modest, compared to our potential. We will work together to take economic ties to a new level. 
Kazaksthan was one of the first countries with which we launched civil nuclear cooperation through a uranium purchase contract. We are pleased to have a much larger second contract now. 
We intend to expand cooperation in other minerals, as well. 
Hydrocarbons is another area of high priority for us. Last evening, we launched the drilling operations for exploration in the first oil field with Indian investments in Kazakhstan. 
I am pleased that President Nazarbayev responded positively to my request to consider additional mature blocks for Indian investments. 
We will also give priority to investment in both directions in manufacturing and infrastructure. I was very encouraged by the interaction at the business roundtable yesterday that I chaired with Prime Minister Massimov. 
We expect a new roadmap for cooperation from the joint business council of our chambers of commerce and industry.
Kazakhstan's Green Bridge Vision is similar to India's ambitious plan of adding 175 GW of renewable energy in the next seven years. This is another priority area of cooperation, including in the manufacture of equipment. In adddition, India will participate on a large scale in the Expo 2017 in Astana. 
We will also enhance cooperation in Space and Information Technology, including their application for governance and development. 
We both agree that connectivity is an important issue, but one that we will address. 
The International North South Transport Corridor, the Iran-Turkmenistan-Kazakhstan rail link, India's interest in joining the Ashkabat Agreement on trade and transit and India's investment in Chahbahar Port in Iran will strengthen connectivity. 
The joint study group on India's proposal for a Free Trade Agreement with Eurasian Economic Union is a step towards our closer economic integration. 
Development of human resources is a priority for both countries. Yesterday, I inaugurated the India-Kazakhstan Centre of Excellence in Information & Communication Technologies at the Eurasian National University. We are pleased to have contributed a super computer from India. 
Consistent with our focus on youth, we have launched a new youth exchange programme with six Kazakh universities for the next five years. 
Our defence and security cooperation is an important dimension of our strategic partnership. We both want to make it stronger, including in defence manufacturing. We welcome the new Memorandum of Understanding on defence cooperation.
President and I agreed on the pressing need for reforms of the United Nations and its Security Council. I thank him for Kazakhstan’s continued support for India’s candidature for a permanent seat in a reformed United Nation's Security Council and for a UN Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism. 
I reiterated India’s support for Kazakhstan’s candidature for a non-permanent seat in the UNSC for 2017-18. 
I am also grateful to him and the people of Kzakhstan for the support in making the International Day of Yoga on June 21st a huge global success 
Mr. President, thank you for a very productive and pleasant visit. I feel that this visit has opened the door to a much broader and deeper relationship, including many new areas of productive cooperation. 
I have extended an invitation to President Nazarbayev and look forward to receiving him in India. 
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
7 7 2015, Kazakhstan
address at Nazarbayev University
Prime Minister Karim Mossimov, 
Mr. Shigeo Katsu, President of the University, 
Students and eminent guests. 
I am delighted to be here.
Mr. Prime Minister, I am deeply honoured that you have joined us today. You are a person of learning and many talents. I learnt today that your skills in Hindi and yoga are among them. 
It is a great privilege to embark on a journey of all five nations of Central Asia. This might be the first time this has happened. 
I am truly excited to visit a great country and a great region that has been called the pivot of human history. 
It is a land of beauty and cultural splendor, of outstanding achievements and great heroism. 
It is also a region of continuous engagement with India since human civilisation began. 
So, I have come here, drawn by history and goodwill and as a neighbour, to write a new chapter in an ancient relationship. 
Tonight, as I speak to the people of Central Asia, I could not have a chosen a better venue than the Nazarbayev University. 
In its short life, it has emerged as an excellent centre of education. And, I congratulate the first batch that has graduated this year. 
The university reflects the vision of President Nazarbayev that education is the foundation of a nation's progress and leadership. 
It recalls the wisdom of the great Kazakh writer, Abai Kunanbaev, who spoke about education as the shield and pillar for Kazakh people. 
Today, Kazakhstan is a nation of global stature and respect. This is not just because Mother Nature has been generous to you with resources of every kind. 
It is because of your investment in education, human resources and infrastructure. These have helped increase the size of the economy four times in the last ten years. 
It is because of your leadership in advancing peace and cooperation in the great Eurasian region. 
It is your vision that has given us the Conference on Interaction and Confidence Building in Asia. 
Kazakhstan is a voice of responsibility and maturity in international forums, including the United Nations. 
No Indian will forget Kazakhstan's generosity in making way for India's bid for the membership of the UN Security Council in 2011-12. We stand solidly behind you for your bid in 2017-18. 
Like Kazakhstan, the rest of Central Asia is on the rise. It is just over two decades since nations here gained independence and regained their identity. 
The countries of Central Asia are endowed with rich human and natural resources.
I am coming from Tashkent. Uzbekistan is experiencing rapid economic growth and progress. Turkemistan, Tajikistan and Kyrgystan are turning their resources into a promise of a more prosperous future. 
You have built modern, inclusive and pluralist nations at a time when many in the region are caught in conflict and instability. 
Your success is as important for the region as it is for the world. 
Central Asia is at the crossroads of Eurasia. It has been caught in the currents of history and it has also shaped it. 
It has seen rise and fall of empires. It has witnessed trade thrive and ebb. 
For monks, merchants and monarchs, it has been both - a destination and a passage. 
It has been an intermediary of cultures and faiths from across Asia. 
Your gifts to human civilisation have been rich. Your imprint on human progress has been lasting. 
And, over the last two thousand years and more, India and Central Asia have influenced each other profoundly. 
For centuries, Buddhism flourished in this part of the world and even influenced Buddhist Art in India. Through here, it spread eastward. 
As I stood in the Gandan Monastery in Mongolia this May, I marveled at that journey of faith that linked Asia across its daunting landscape. 
The confluence of Indian and Islamic civilisations took place in Central Asia. We enriched each other not only in spiritual thought, but also in medicine, science, mathematics and astronomy. 
The Islamic heritage of both India and Central Asia is defined by the highest ideals of Islam – knowledge, piety, compassion and welfare. This is a heritage founded on the principle of love and devotion. And, it has always rejected the forces of extremism. 
Today, this is an important source of strength that brings India and Central Asia together. 
The richness of our ties is written into the contours of our cities and our daily lives. We see this in architecture and art, handicraft and textile and in most popular food. 
The dargahs of Delhi resonate with Sufi music that draws people from all faiths. 
The cities of Central Asia have become centres of yoga and Hindi, long before the world came together to celebrate the International Day of Yoga on 21st June. 
Uzbekistan has recently completed fifty years of radio broadcast in Hindi. Our epics Ramayana and Mahabharata were popular on Uzbek TV as they were in India. 
Many of you wait for the release of the latest Bollywood film with the same excitement as people in India. 
This is the source of goodwill between our people. It is the foundation of a relationship of hearts and emotions. And, it cannot be measured only by the scale of trade or the demands of States. 
It was evident when President Nazarbayev and the leaders of other Central Asian Republics came to India soon after their nation's independence. 
Since then, our political engagement has deepened. Our defence and security cooperation is growing. 
Trade is expanding, but it is still modest. Our cooperation in energy sector has begun. Later today, we will launch the drilling of the first oil well with Indian investments in Kazakhstan. 
Indian investments in Central Asia have started flowing in. And, so have Indian tourists in growing numbers. More than 50 flights a week connect the five Central Asian capitals to India. And, it takes about the same time as it would take to fly to Chennai from Delhi. 
Our strongest progress is in human resource development. Thousands of professionals and students from Central Asia have trained in India. Many from India come to the universities in the region. 
We have established Centres of Excellence in Information and Communication Technology in the region. And, we are also pleased that we have three Indian cultural centres in the region. 
Yet, we will be the first to say that the engagement between India and Central Asia falls short of its promise and potential. 
We have a special place in our hearts for each other. But, we have not paid as much attention to each other as we should. 
This will change. 
That is why I am travelling to all five countries in the region in the early stages of my Government. 
Both India and Central Asia cannot achieve their full potential without each other. Nor will our people be safer and our region more stable without our cooperation. 
India constitutes one-sixth of humanity. It is a nation of 800 million youth that is an enormous force of progress and change for India and the world. 
Our economy is growing at 7.5% every year. We can sustain higher growth rates long into the future. 
India is the new frontier of opportunities for the world. 
Central Asia is a vast region of immense resources, talented people, rapid growth and a strategic location. 
So, I am here to start a new era in our relationship with Central Asia. 
India is prepared to invest more in a new partnership of prosperity.
We will work together not just in minerals and energy, but in industries such as pharmaceuticals, textiles, engineering and small and medium enterprises. We can invest in refineries, petrochemicals and fertilizer plants here. 
We can harness our strength in information and communication technology to create wealth and opportunities for our youth. Today, I will inaugurate a Centre of Excellence in Astana with a Super Computer from India. 
We can use the reach of Space technology for closer partnership in development and resource management. 
I also see vast opportunities in areas like agriculture and dairy. We can renew our old ties in traditional medicines. 
Central Asia is a natural destination for the Indian tourists. 
We are intensifying our exchanges in culture, education and research. And we will connect our youth more. 
In this troubled world, we must also strengthen our defence and security cooperation to defend our values, our nations' security and our region's peace. 
We live at the frontier of instability. We live close to the crucible of extremism and terrorism. 
We see terrorism spawned by nations and groups. Today, we also see cyber space become a platform without borders for terror to draw recruits to its cause. 
From theatres of conflicts to the calm neighbourhoods of distant cities, terrorism has become a global challenge as never before. 
It is a force that is larger and more enduring than its changing names, locations and targets. 
So, we must ask ourselves: Will we let a generation of youth be lost to guns and hate, because they will hold us accountable for their lost future? 
So, during this visit, we will strengthen our defence and security cooperation in the region. But, we will also combat terrorism by the strength of our values and our commitment to humanism. 
This is a responsibility that India and Central Asian nations owe to our shared inheritance and to the future of our region. 
Our shared values and aspirations are also the foundation of closer international partnership, including in the United Nations. 
But, in a transformed world, we also see the growing institutional erosion of the United Nations. As nations that are committed to international order, we must work to make it relevant to our times. So, as the United Nations turns 70, we should press for reforms of the United Nations, especially its Security Council. 
India's membership of Shanghai Cooperation Organisation will deepen our regional partnership. 
And we have begun a study on a Free Trade Agreement with the Eurasian Economic Union for deeper integration with this region. 
This is an era in which Space and Cyber are making roads and rails less relevant. 
But, we will also restore our physical connectivity for trade, transit and energy. 
The International North South Transport Corridor opens a competitive and quick route for India to Eurasia. And, I hope all of Central Asia will join it. 
We hope to join the Ashgabat Agreement on trade and transit. 
India's investment in Chahbahar Port in Iran will bring us closer to Central Asia. 
I also hope that we can restore the traditional route to Central Asia through Pakistan and Afghanistan. 
We can draw confidence from the agreement between Turkmenistan, Afghanistan, Pakistan and India on the gas pipeline. 
This region has prospered the most when we have been connected. 
Indeed, our hopes of an Asian Century will be realized, when we see Asia as one - not as South, West, East or Central. Asia will rise when we all prosper together. 
For that, we must connect Asia's different parts. 
India is at the crossroads of Asia's land and sea routes. We understand our responsibility. And, we are working with a sense of priority to connect ourselves to the East and the West, by land and sea. 
There is a surge of interest in reconnecting Asia with itself and beyond. 
Our former Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee ji called for a New Silk Route Initiative here in 2002. 
Today, all of Asia seeks the revival of the glorious ancient Silk Road. 
But, we must also remember the lessons of history. 
The Silk Road flourished and waned with the fortunes of Central Asia. 
The end of the Silk Road did not just come about from the rise of sea-based trade of the new European powers. 
It also happened because Central Asia was no longer a bridge between regions, but the new fault line between great empires to the east, west and south; 
When it was no longer the hub of trade, but a land in the shadows of the high walls of the powers around it. Central Asian nations declined and trade withered. 
The success of connectivity through and across Central Asia is important. 
For that, the great nations of Central Asia must flourish and regain their central role in Eurasia. 
From Europe to Asia, all nations must foster a climate of cooperation and collaboration, not competition and exclusion, in this region. 
The region must remain stable and peaceful, free from conflict and the violence of extremism and terrorism. 
And, as Central Asia links the East and the West, it must also connect to the South. 
For that is how it always was.
In an age of globalization, Asia cannot remain fragmented. And, Central Asia cannot remain distant and disconnected from India. 
I am confident that we can make it happen. Our ancestors crossed the mighty Himalaya, Karakoram, Hindu Kush and Pamirs for spiritualism, knowledge, and markets. 
We will all work together to build the Silk Route of the 21st century. We will connect through space and cyber as we will by air, land and sea. 
Let me conclude with a few lines from Abduraheim Otkur, a poet of this region. He said:
“Our tracks remain, our dreams remain, everything remains, far away, yet 
Even if the wind blows, or the sand shift, they will never be covered, our tracks, 
And the caravan will never stop along the way, though our horses are very thin; 
One way or another, these tracks will be found someday, by our grandchildren; 
Or our great grandchildren.” 
I say this to you: India and Central Asia will redeem that promise. 
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
6 7 2015, Uzbekistan
Joint press breifing with the president of Uzbekistan
His Excellency President Islam Karimov, President of Uzbekistan, Members of the Media, 
I am delighted to be in the historic and beautiful city of Tashkent. It carries the warmth of familiarity that comes from sights and stories we grow up with. 
I thank President Karimov and the people of Uzbekistan for their very warm welcome and hospitality. 
It is a pleasure to meet President Karimov. He has led with great vision and wisdom to steer Uzbekistan’s progress and advance peace and prosperity in the region. 
Today, I have embarked on a five-nation tour of Central Asia. It reflects our resolve to start a new era in our relations with Central Asian Republics. 
Our relationship with the region has ancient roots and has left a strong imprint on both. It now occupies a significant place in India’s future. 
I have begun my journey in Uzbekistan. This underlines this nation’s importance for India, not just in the context of this region, but also more broadly in Asia. 
In recent years, India and Uzbekistan have built a strategic partnership on the foundation of mutual respect and shared interests. 
This includes expanding economic cooperation, combating terrorism, advancing stability in the region and promoting regional integration. 
President Karimov and I had very cordial and productive discussions. His perspectives will be of immense benefit to me in the days ahead. 
I share President Karimov’s desire to raise the level of our economic engagement. I conveyed to him that there is a strong interest in Indian business to invest in Uzbekistan. There is immense potential in a broad range of areas in Uzbekistan. I have urged him to make the process and the policies for Indian investments here smoother. President responded positively to my suggestion. 
President was also supportive of strengthening our ongoing cooperation in the areas of agriculture, Information Technology and energy. 
We also discussed steps needed to implement the contract for supply of uranium from Uzbekistan signed earlier. 
President Karimov and I discussed various initiatives to further enhance connectivity between India and Uzbekistan. 
I briefed him about the International North South Transport Corridor and proposed that Uzbekistan consider becoming a member. I sought his support for India joining the Ashgabat Agreement. 
I am pleased with the agreements in the areas of Culture and Tourism, because they will bring our people closer. 
Few countries can match Uzbekistan in nurturing Hindi and Indian culture. Tomorrow, I look forward to meeting a vibrant group of Indologists and Hindi linguists. 
India will expand cooperation in capacity building through increase in the number of training offers in India. Consistent with our commitment, the Uzbekistan-India Information Technology Centre has been upgraded this year. 
I welcome President Karimov’s assurance to ensure speedy completion of the Entrepreneurship Development Centre being set up in Tashkent. 
We also discussed regional and international issues, including the situation in Afghanistan. We also have shared concerns on the rising threat of extremism and terrorism in our extended neighbourhood. 
We agreed to intensify security cooperation and exchanges. The bilateral Joint Working Group on Counter Terrorism will meet later this year. We also agreed to strenghen cooperation in defence and cyber security. 
We look forward to working together within the framework of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization. 
Tomorrow, I will be paying a visit to the Monument of Independence and Humanism and the Memorial of Late Indian Prime Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri. We are thankful to the people of Tashkent and Uzbekistan, for preserving the legacy of our former Prime Minister. 
This has been a very rewarding visit. It has sown the seeds of a rich harvest in the years ahead. 
I look forward to the opportunity of receiving President Karimov in India. 
Thank you again for your hospitality and a wonderful meeting. Thank You.
#DELIMITER#
28 6 2015, India
Mann ki Baat
Namaskar, My Dear Countrymen!
Last time in Mann ki Baat I had requested you to send me memorable pictures if you go out on a vacation anywhere in India and if you happen to find them, kindly post them under the ‘Incredible India’ hashtag. When Isaid that, I had never imagined that it would get such an immense response. Lakhs of people have posted photos on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram. I can say that India is full of diversities and I was able to witness so many magnificent scenes in those pictures; be it of architecture, art, nature, waterfalls, mountains, rivers or seas. Government of India had never thought that in terms of tourism you all could contribute in such a massive way. I liked some pictures so much that I re-tweeted them. And as I understand, if some one would not have posted the picture of Belum caves in Andhra Pradesh many people would have never come to know that something like that exists in our country. Madhya Pradesh’s Orcha Fort is another example of that. We assume Rajasthan to be a state with scarcity of water, but when someone sends a photo of Menal waterfall, it is a matter of great surprise. Really, a tremendous work has been done. We will promote and also continue doing such work and the entire world will watch it, entire nation will watch it and our new generation will also watch it.
My beloved countrymen, though you have elected me as the Prime Minister of the country but at times, the human in me shuns all posts and prestige associated with it and submerges oneself within it. I can say that 21st June, the International Yoga Day affected me in the same manner. At that time, when I proposed the International Yoga Day, it was just an idea. But the scene that was witnessed on 21st June was such that wherever the sun dawned, wherever its rays reached, there was not a single landmass wherein it was not welcomed by way of Yoga. We can say with conviction that the sun never sets in the world of Yoga practitioners.
The way Yoga was received and was welcomed with open arms around the world, there would not be any Indian who would not be proud of it. I too got delighted. And when the people of France chose River Seine and Eiffel Tower in which they take pride to do Yoga, they gave an equal status to it as River Siene and Eifel Tower. In New York people did yoga at Times Square. If we think about Sydney, Australia then the picture of Opera House comes to our mind. The citizens of Australia gave equal respect to yoga and did yoga at the Opera House. Whether it is North America, Silicon Valley or Milan’s Duomo Cathedral it is a matter of great pride for us. On 21st June when I saw Mr. Ban Ki-Moon, UN Secretary General doing yoga at UN Headquarters, I was really delighted. Similarly, UN Peace Keeping Force did a spectacular display of Yoga. In India, our soldiers too were doing yoga in Siachen on white sheet of snow and on sea too, wherever our naval ships are posted, the yoga program was being carried out by Indian Navy. Delhi made it to the Guinness Book of World Records . Rajpath turned into the Yogpath that day. I am thankful to India and the rest of the world and can say that the International Yoga Day was not for namesake. It seemed as if that from every corner of the world, there was a new inquisitiveness, new joy, new hope and new connection.
Few days back, when I tweeted a photo of a Vietnamese child doing yoga, it was such a sweet photo that it got a lot of attention from the entire world. Everybody, be it men-women, old-young, village-city, developed or developing countries, everybody got connected with it. Yoga in true terms, became the core reason to connect the entire world. I do not know how the intellectual class, elites of the world would analyze this event. But I can feel and every Indian can experience that the whole world is very curious to know more about India. Curiosity towards India has increased. The world wants to know about the values, the rituals and the heritage of India. It is our responsibility that without any artificiality we share our legacy and introduce ourselves to the world. We can only do this when we ourselves are proud of our traditions.
At times, we are so familiar with our values that we don’t feel there is anything new in them but we ourselves do not know that our family values are considered to be a big thing in the entire world. Why don’t we familiarize the outside world with our family values? The world would be very surprised to know about them. I am sure, they would be intrigued. There are many things that our forefathers have given to us which are the best and the entire world also has the right on those things. The success of International Yoga day has brought in a new responsibility along with it. It is our responsibility that we gift supreme Yoga teachers to the world. It is our responsibility that we can see the entire tradition of Yoga on one platform from the Universe.
I request the youngsters, especially the IT professionals, that all of you should come together to create an Online Yoga Activity program. We all should come to know about all the Yoga organizations, Yoga teachers and all the necessary information about the Yoga from this online program. One database must be prepared and I believe you can do it. One must start from somewhere and it would surely turn out to be a great power. I have seen and learnt from the perspective of recent occurrences that a government that works and the government that is action-oriented can bring in results if the targets are set. We should not forget that the only voice that could be heard one year ago was that nothing happens, nothing happens, nothing happens.
Can you imagine that there is a department under Government named Ayush. Nobody has paid attention towards this department. The only mention Ayush in some corner of the newspaper being a small department is once in 2 to 5 years. But it led on the International Yoga Day. It was this small department that organized this event in the entire world. Therefore, this is an example that if there is an aim then even a small department can do a supreme job.
In the last few days, the world saw how we saved people from Yemen to Afghanistan. In a few hours-, we reached Nepal and helped people over there. When people wanted to open an bank account under the Government’s new scheme of Jan Dhan Yojana, how the people working in bank helped them to do so and connected millions of Indians to the bank.
On 15th August last year, when I appealed from the Red Fort for toilets in schools, I had said that by next 15th August we have to complete this task. The work which could not be completed in last 60 years was promised to be completed by the end of one year. The promise was really daring. Almost four and half lakh toilets were to be built but I can say it with satisfaction that though 15th August is still far off, the work of constructing toilets by the people is on the verge of completion.
This means that the Government, people and Government workers, all want to work for the country. If we pledge to work in an unselfish manner “Welfare for All, Happiness for All” then the Government will also work efficiently. The people who are a part of the government will also work efficiently and the people of the nation will welcome them with open arms.
I have experienced this. This is the true strength that drives a nation forward. Last month, we had launched three Insurance schemes. I had launched them from Kolkata and it has received such a commendable response in such a short span of time. There have been very few steps which have been taken from the perspective of social security but by way of these three schemes we are taking a big leap. In such a short time span more than 10 crore people have become a part of these schemes but we have to take it further. I have a thought which I want to put forth before you. Rakshabandhan comes in the month of August. Can’t we start a massive movement before this festival and make every women, be it our mother or sister, a part of this, thereby giving benefit to them under this Insurance program. Be it a sister who is a domestic help in your home or your own sister why can’t we gift them a Rs. 12 or Rs. 330 scheme on Rakshabandhan for their entire life. This can be a big gift for a sister from their brother. Why can’t we set the eve of rakshabandhan as a target and in a number of 2 crore, 5 crore, 7 crore and 10 crore … try to reach the sisters so that they can reap the benefit of this scheme. Let’s come together and try to work together towards the completion of this pledge.
Whenever I hold a Mann ki Baat session, many people send me suggestions. This time many people have suggested that I say something about the monsoons. Yogesh Dandekar from Nagpur, Harshvardhan ji from Mysore, Praveen Nadkarni ji, Divyanshu Gupta ji have all asked me to say something about the monsoon in this session of Mann ki Baat. They have sent in some really good suggestions. And this is a season of happiness. And each one of us, whatever the age is… definitely tempted to enjoy the first showers of the monsoon. I am sure, you too might be enjoying the rains with bhajiyas, pakoras, corn and a hot cup of tea. Just as the rays of the sun give us life, similarly rainfall provide us life and sustenance. Every drop of water is precious. As a responsible citizen and as a member of the society, we will have to cultivate the habit of conserving every drop of water. It should be our pledge that water from the villages stays in the villages and water for the cities remains available for them. If the rain water does not flow away, it goes into the earth , then the aquifers get recharged and the year long water woes get resolved. Rain water harvesting is not a new concept. It is being practiced over the centuries. Be it check dams, watershed development, small lakes or the small ponds in fields, we need to save the precious waters everywhere. I always tell people, that if you go to Porbander, the birth place of Mahatma Gandhi, you will be able to see a two hundred year old underground water tank which got directly recharged with the rain water. You can still see it. If you ever go there, do visit the place. And you will find that even after two hundred years it is still functional, brimming with water and the water does not even stagnate. Porbander is a coastal city, so potable water was collected through the rains for the entire year. Even in those times such a lot of care was taken. We can too do the same. This should in fact become a mass movement. Each and every village should have the facilities for rain water harvesting.
Similarly, we find greenery so pleasing to our eyes. We all like greener surroundings. Gardens and trees bring in an element of freshness in our lives. This monsoon season, there should be mass plant sowing campaigns conducted by youth and social organizations. And I can take a leaf from my personal experience and offer you a suggestion which has been very successful. This is an intensely rural technology. Whenever you sow a plant, place an earthen pot near it. You just need to fill it once or twice in a month. You will see how fast the plant grows into a lush green tree. I have even been telling the farmers to plant trees on the boundaries of their fields instead of putting barricades. These will become your biggest asset in the long run.
It is true that rains are enjoyable and bring in a lot of fun at the same time. It is also true that rains also bring in many diseases. Doctors get to see so many patients that they hardly get the time to breathe. We all know that rains cause many water borne diseases. Increased moisture in the environment leads to bacterial growth and so, keeping the environment clean becomes important. Cleanliness is very important in monsoons. It is often requested to consume safe drinking water. Most of the people boil and drink water during this season. It has its own benefits. And this is true that the more care we take, healthier we would be. We need monsoons and we need water but we also need to stay healthy.
Dear citizens, we have recently launched three schemes for the people in the cities. We have around 500 small cities. Our policy is ‘Waste to Wealth’. We can earn from waste too. Garbage can be recycled to make fertilizers, bricks and even electricity. Contaminated water can be recycled to make it clent and be used for irrigation in the fields. We have to take this movement forward.
In the Amrut scheme, we have launched a massive campaign and taken up initiatives to improve the quality of life in our cities. We should become a country which is able to match the living standards of the world. We should have smart cities, comparable to world standards. And yet at the same time, the poorest of poor person should have an accommodation of his own and that too complete with water, electricity, sanitation and access to a school. In 2022 when India celebrates its 75 years of Independence, we wish that every Indian has a house of his own. Keeping all this in mind, we have launched three major schemes. I am positive that these schemes will bring about a qualitative difference in the lives of the urban people.
I am myself connected to you via the social media. I keep getting many new suggestions and new ideas and also good and bad information about our government. And sometimes it so happens that a small comment from an individual in some remote village in India conveys something that just touches our hearts. You are aware that the government has launched “Beti Bachao Beti Padhao” programme. But you can’t imagine the force that is lent to the programme when a village or a society adopts it. A few days back a Sarpanch in a small remote village of Haryana, Sri Sunil Jaglan ji launched ‘Selfie with Daughter’ campaign. Such an environment was created that every father wished to click a selfie of himself with his daughter and post it on the social media.
I liked this idea, and that too for a special reason. In Haryana, the number of girls in comparison to boys is dismally low. Around another 100 districts in the country have a similar dismal situation of skewed sex ratio. But it is the worst in Haryana. In that very same Haryana, if a Sarpanch of a small indistinct village lends this meaning to the “Beti Bachao Beti Padhao” programme, then I certainly get overwhelmed. It makes me so happy and it gives me a new hope and I do express my happiness. I request you all to take a selfie with your daughter and post it on #selfie with daughter. And do not forget to post a tagline around the theme of “Beti Bachao Beti Padhao” with it, whatever be the language it can be in Hindi, English, your mother tongue or your native language. And I promise to re-tweet the most inspirational tagline with you and your daughter’s selfie. We can turn “Beti Bachao Beti Padhao” into a mass movement. I urge you all to take forward the programme launched by Sri Sunil in Bibipur village of Haryana. I request you all to post on #selfie with daughter. Lets us all enjoy the rising honour and prestige of our daughters and see how joyful this entire experience of “Beti Bachao Beti Padhao” becomes. Let us all rid ourselves of this bad name that we have for not respecting our daughters.
So my best wishes to you for the coming monsoon season. May all of you enjoy the rains. Make our country clean and green. And remember, the International Yoga day was not a single day initiative. Continue practicing Yoga, then see what difference it makes to you and your life. And I say this from my experience. Please take this forward. Make Yoga a part of your life. And that initiative regarding Incredible India, do keep posting a picture of whichever part of the country you go to. The country and the world will awaken to our diversity. I felt that the handicrafts did not receive due attention. Do make it a point to post the handicrafts of the local region you visit. There are so many things that people around you might be making, the poor as well as the skilled might be creating. Do keep posting their pictures regularly. We have to expand our reach to the world and make India known to the world. We have an easy medium at our disposal and so we will all do it.
My dear countrymen, that is all for today. I shall meet you again in the next edition of Mann ki Baat. Many people expect me to announce some huge schemes during this programme. But I am working day and night towards those. This is my time for some light conversation with you all. This gives me immense pleasure.
Thank You Very Much!
#DELIMITER#
19 6 2015, India
Visit of President of Tanzania
Excellency President Jakaya Mrisho Kikwete, 
Members of the Media, 
I am delighted to welcome President Kikwete and his delegation to India. 
My Government has the pleasure of hosting him as the first Head of State from Africa on a State Visit to India.
President Kikwete's vision and leadership over the past decade have advanced political stability and economic growth in Tanzania. 
He has worked for a future of peace and cooperation in Africa. 
And, we deeply value his strong commitment to relations with India. 
India and Tanzania are connected by Indian Ocean. Its currents have carried our centuries-old human links. It prospers through nearly 50,000 people of Indian origin in Tanzania. 
We have an emotional bond of a shared history of struggle against colonialism. 
We have spoken in one voice for a life of equality and dignity for all people. 
We have been partners in the cause of deeper cooperation among developing countries and a greater voice for them in international forums. 
We have shared aspirations for inclusive economic development.
We have a common interest in maritime security in the Indian Ocean and a peaceful and prosperous Africa. Terrorism in our respective regions is a concern for both countries. We have agreed to establish a Joint Working Group to strengthen our co-operation in counter-terrorism. 
We not only have a broad range of shared interests, but also a close relationship. We are pleased to be Tanzania's largest trading partner and a long-standing development partner.
President Kikwete and I had comprehensive and productive talks today. I assured him of India's continuing commitment to relations with Tanzania. 
Our trade of over 4 billion U.S. dollars is heavily in India's favour. I urged President Kikwete to open up more sectors for investments and exports.
Indian investments in Tanzania exceed 3 billion U.S. dollars and cover many areas. Indian investors are ready to invest more in Tanzania that would support Tanzania's development and trade. 
I offered our cooperation in the development of the potentially rich natural gas sector in Tanzania. 
We discussed cooperation in the maritime sector and ocean economy. The agreement on hydrography is an important step forward in our cooperation in this sector.
We are pleased to be a partner in the development of human resources, healthcare, agriculture, institutions and infrastructure in Tanzania. 
I assured President Kikwete that our development partnership will continue, as our agreements today indicate. 
Tanzanian nationals in growing numbers travel to India. We have nearly 2000 Tanzanian students in India. I have informed President Kikwete that we will soon extend our e-tourist visa scheme to Tanzania. 
We also discussed regional and global issues of mutual interest. We are ready to expand cooperation in counter-terrorism and maritime security. 
We greatly appreciate Tanzania's support for India's candidature for a permanent seat in an expanded UN Security Council.
I briefed President Kikwete about the Third India-Africa Forum Summit to be held in October in New Delhi. For the first time, we have invited leaders of the 54 African countries. 
Tanzania is an important part of India-Africa partnership. President Kikwete co-chaired the First India-Africa Forum Summit in 2008. We look forward to his participation too. 
Let me conclude by saying that our relations with Tanzania and Africa will continue to grow. 
It is a great pleasure to host the leader of an Indian Ocean neighbour in Delhi. 
Thank you
#DELIMITER#
6 6 2015, Bangladesh
Joint press with prime minister of bangladesh
Excellency, Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina 
Members of the media, 
Thank you for your kind words of welcome. Thank you for your thoughts on the relationship and our meeting today. 
I am deeply honoured and touched by your special gestures for my visit. Everything I have experienced here reflects the warmth and generosity of the people of Bangladesh. And for me, there is the wonderful feeling of visiting a close neighbour. 
This morning I paid tribute to Bangabandhu, a great leader of our era. His vision and leadership, his humanism and sacrifices, gave birth to the dream of Sonar Bangla. Today, that dream prospers through the leadership of Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina and the genius of the people of Bangladesh. 
Earlier today, we launched two bus services that will connect our citizens more easily and our two nations more closely. We were privileged to have with us the Chief of Minister of West Bengal. 
These two events highlight our shared values and inter-connected destinies. 
My first visit to Bangladesh is a special moment for me. My personal journey has been enriched by the good wishes from countless people here. 
We are not just neighbours. We are two nations bound by the threads of history, religion, culture, language and kinship – and, of course, passion for cricket. 
We have the emotional bonds of shared struggles and sacrifices that bring us together as sovereign and equal nations. 
Now, we are successful fellow travelers on the road to development. Our growing cooperation is a picture of my deeply held belief in the shared prosperity of neighbours. 
That is why the future I dream for India is the future I wish for Bangladesh. 
As we deepen our political engagement and celebrate our rich inheritance, as our economies get more integrated and our people better connected, our nations will become more prosperous. 
It will also open new economic doors for India's Northeast. And, it will enable our two countries to integrate South Asia and connect it with the dynamic East. 
The vision of SAARC is a gift of Bangladesh. 
We are also among the largest contributors to United Nations Peacekeeping. And, we can also make our region safer and more prosperous, and the seas more secure. 
This is a relationship of great importance for us and our region. 
The visit is at a historic moment. We have resolved a question that has lingered since Independence. Our two nations have a settled boundary. It will make our borders more secure and people's life there more stable. 
Our Parliament's approval of Land Boundary Agreement reflects the consensus in India on relations with Bangladesh. 
We accepted the settlement of the maritime boundary last year. It is evidence of the maturity of our ties and our shared commitment to international rules. 
So, we stand at a moment of huge opportunity in our relationship. Prime Minister and I recognise that. 
We will work together to harness the rich potential of our relationship. And, we will address our challenges in a spirit of friendship and from a position of mutual trust and confidence. 
Our agreements reflect this vision and commitment. 
We have renewed existing trade and transport agreements. We have added new dimensions to our economic ties. 
The coastal shipping agreement will boost bilateral trade. The Indian Economic Zone will promote Indian investments in Bangladesh. 
The new border haat at Kamalasagar will reinforce traditional economic links. And, the agreement on blue economy and maritime cooperation opens a new area of economic opportunities. We should now extend our frontiers of cooperation to Space. 
I am conscious of the huge trade imbalance, despite duty free and quota free access to Bangladesh in India on all but 25 items. Yet, I have assured Prime Minister that we will do everything we can to bridge the deficit. 
Indian investments in Bangladesh will help. I will also try to make trade smoother and easier, including at the border. The agreement on standards and testing is a step in that direction. 
Power supply from India to Bangladesh will grow from 500 MW to 1100 MW within two years. The 1320 MW Rampal power project is making progress in accordance with your laws and regulation. We can do more together in power sector, here and in India. 
Connectivity is the catalyst for deeper engagement. Bangladesh's decision to allow transit of power equipment and food-grain to the Northeast echoes the strength of your human values and our shared economic opportunities. 
Connectivity by road, rail, rivers, sea, transmission lines, petroleum pipelines and digital links will increase. Today, we have unveiled some of the pathways to this future. 
As I have said before, we will deepen regional connectivity and cooperation between Bangladesh, Bhutan, India and Nepal. There is a natural logic to this arrangement. 
Our development partnership is scaling new heights. The quick implementation of the line of credit of 800 million U.S. dollars and full disbursement of 200 million dollars in grant is a tribute to our cooperation. 
We are pleased to extend another line of credit of 2 billion U.S. dollars to support infrastructure and other development activities in Bangladesh. 
As the three agreements on human trafficking, fake Indian currency and maritime safety show, our security cooperation is growing. 
I am confident that we both have the political will and mutual confidence to further improve border management and coordination to prevent illegal activities, trafficking and movements. 
Our rivers should nurture our relationship, not become a source of discord. Water sharing is, above all, a human issue. It affects life and livelihood on both sides of the border. 
We have shown political resolve and mutual goodwill with the Land Boundary Agreement. 
I am confident that with the support of state governments in India, we can reach a fair solution on Teesta and Feni Rivers. We should also work together to renew and clean our rivers. 
Excellency, people in India admire your nation's progress despite many challenges. We want you to succeed in your Mission 2021 and 2041. The success of Bangladesh is important for the region and the world. 
So is the success of our partnership. We are two nations defined by our youth. We owe it to them to set new directions and scale new heights in our relations. I am confident that we have done that today. 
And for everything again I say Thank you, thanks a lot.
#DELIMITER#
31 5 2016, India
Mann ki Baat
My Dear Countrymen,
Last time when I addressed Mann ki Baat, I was extremely distracted and upset by the earthquake that had struck then. My mind did not allow me to speak, but still I spoke Mann ki Baat. Today, when I am addressing Mann ki Baat, we are all surrounded by severe hot weather, with all the heat related problems and news from all corners of the country. I would like to request you all to take care of your health in this hot weather by following simple instructions, such as drinking ample amount of water and covering yourself for protection from the heat. At the same time, I would also like to request you all to take care of the birds and animals in your neighbourhood and fulfill their requirements too. We should take this opportunity to give the responsibility to our children to place a bowl of water for the birds in a suitable place where the water does not get heated up. By doing this, I can assure you that your children will imbibe good moral and cultural values. Moreover, in this extreme heat, this act will be a life saver for the birds and animals too.
This summer season is marked on one side by the extreme heat conditions, while on the other side there is both happiness and sadness. After completing our exams, we are in a state of anxiety until the announcement of the results. Now, CBSE and the other boards have declared their results and I would like to congratulate each and every student who has passed with flying colours. I came to know the significance of Mann ki Baat when many students, after obtaining their exam results, informed me that they listened carefully to my words on Mann ki Baat and followed them strictly during their exams, which has in turn proven to be quite fruitful and beneficial. Well Friends, I am glad to know this through your letters. However, the true reason behind your success is not any Mann ki Baat, but your hard work throughout the year and the consistent support from your entire family. Your school, your teachers and many others have a role to play in your success, and you have strived hard to attain this success, in order to meet everybody’s expectations. Mann ki Baat is a kind of exam tip given before entering the examination hall. However, today I really enjoy the fact that Mann ki Baat has created a significant impact, and I am very happy about it. While I speak about happiness surrounding our friends, who have passed with good scores, I would also like to make a mention of many of our friends who may have got low scores and some of them who were not successful. To all those who have passed, I would like to remind them that they are in that stage of their lives where they can choose their career in the right direction. Now, you have the opportunity to decide that right path for your career according to your wish and capabilities. Please also remember that your future will depend on the path which you choose. Generally, I have observed that most of the students have no idea about what they should study, why they need to study, or where they should study. They are also not aware of the aims in their lives. Many students mostly choose their career paths based on the opinions of their friends and families or based on the wishes of their parents. Our universe has expanded itself in all directions. There are no limits for the choice of subjects or opportunities. You must be careful and determined in choosing your career path, in accordance with your talent and capabilities. Why do you always have to choose the prevailing opportunities? Try your best. Try to utilise the talents within you to gain new opportunities. At the same time, you should also think how you can contribute to the betterment of your nation from what you have learned or what you become.
You will be shocked to hear about the fact that, as compared to the number of museums built around the world, the number of museums in India is very few. It is very difficult to find the right staff members for these museums as it is not a conventionally popular field. I do not want to drag on one topic. However, my only point is that our nation is in dire need of excellent teachers, soldiers, scientists, as well as artists and musicians. The field of sports is very broad, wherein other than players, various eminent human resources are also required for the fulfilment of any sports activity. This proves that we are surrounded by a vast variety of fields and opportunities on this planet. We all must try with strong determination. Your strengths, your capabilities, your dreams – all should be aligned to the dreams of our nation. This is your only chance to choose your right path.
To those who have not succeeded, I would like to tell them that success or failure is part of life. Those who consider failure as an opportunity, always head towards the foundation of success. Those who give up in life, due to failure, can never reach the heights of success. We can learn a lot from our failures. Why not we believe that our failures can provide us the opportunity to know ourselves better and understand our strengths, and by knowing our strengths and talents, we will be able to choose the right path in life.
I am reminded of our nation’s ex-President, Shri A. P. J. Abdul Kalam. In his book “My Journey- Transforming dreams into Action”, he has mentioned an incident that took place in his life. He says that he always aspired to become a pilot. However, when he tried to become a pilot, he failed and could not clear his exams. Now, you can see that his failure gave him a great opportunity in his life. He became a great scientist of our nation. He became the President of India and his contribution stands unparalleled in the field of nuclear energy in India. Therefore, friends, please do not bend yourselves under the burden of failure. Failure is a kind of opportunity. Do not let the failure go without learning a lesson from it. Try to search for a hope and opportunity that lies hidden in your failure. This is my humble request to all my young friends, and also to their family members – if your son fails, please do not create an atmosphere which can force him to lose all hopes in his life. Sometimes, the children’s failure is associated with their parents’ dream which leads to various problems in future. It should not happen. Fighting with failures can provide us the strength to live our lives peacefully. I would once again like to congratulate all my young friends who have passed out with flying colours. I would also like to convey my thoughts to my young friends who have failed, but I congratulate them to have obtained opportunities to find a right path in their lives. Please try and strive to move forward with hope and trust in your lives.
Meanwhile, many incidents have happened since my previous Mann ki Baat. Our government has completed one year. The entire nation analysed us quite minutely and criticised us. Many people gave us a distinction for our governance. In democracy, I believe that it is very important to receive the feedback from the supporters and the opposition, in politics. We must try to understand the drawbacks and the areas where we lag behind. It is also beneficial to understand our merits.
In my case, I am happy with all that has happened so far. My heart is always yearning to do something for the poor people in our country. I always think of novel ideas and accept suggestions from others in order to help the poor. Last month, we launched 3 key policies to provide social security to the people of our society, i.e. Prime Minister’s Suraksha Bima Yojna, Prime Minister’s Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojna, and Atal Pension Yojna. It has been just twenty days since the launch of these policies, and I can proudly say that due to your trust in our nation, our government and our programmes and policies, the common citizens of our country have joined hands with us in such huge numbers. I am extremely happy in sharing the fact that within a short span of 20 days, more than 8 crore and 52 lakhs people have registered their names for these programmes. We have adopted important measures in the path of social security and it will act as a boon for the people in the future years.
For those who have not yet received this information, I would like to request them to acquire these benefits as soon as possible. No one could have imagined receiving Suraksha Bima Yojna by investing just one rupee per month or 12 rupees in a year. In order to get the benefits of Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojna, you need to invest just 330 rupees in a year, which is less than a rupee per day. Therefore, by using these benefits, the poor will not be dependent on others for their living. The poor will become independent and self-confident. We are adopting different measures in this direction. I want to create an army of people, my army comprising of poor people will fight against poverty and defeat it. Our nation has been burdened with poverty for years now, and we will take appropriate steps to try and eliminate poverty from our nation. We are sure we will succeed.
Another most important development is the introduction of a channel for farmers on television, and I am feeling happy about it. We have a number of channels on televisions in our country, such as cartoon channels, sports channels, news channels and entertainment channels. For me, the channel for farmers is very important as I can clearly see the future of farmers through this channel.
According to my view, this channel is like an open university for farmers and their farms. This is a channel where both students and teachers are farmers. These farmers can learn a lot of things through excellent experience and move from traditional farming towards modern farming. Only minimal areas are left for farming. The families of farmers are increasing in number, but the land area is reducing. Due to this problem, it is very critical to understand the ways to grow crops efficiently, in such small areas. Now, we can get details about the weather forecast and plan accordingly. The channels for farmers will be focussing on these various issues. My farmer brothers and sisters, a system for monitoring farmers has been arranged in each of our districts. Please contact the respective district heads for availing this benefit.
I would like to speak to my fisherman brothers and sisters, to all those who are involved with fishery. There are many things for them to learn from this channel. In India, animal husbandry has been a traditional segment in a villager’s life, which acts as a supportive role in farming. However, as compared to the number of animals and the amount of milk production in various countries around the world, India lacks far behind. As compared to the numbers of animals, the estimated amount of milk production is not achieved in our country. The process by which we can produce more milk per animal, the ways in which the animals can be taken care of and the types of food that should be provided to them, are some the important factors to be considered. We take various measures based on our traditions, but we need to move forward by adopting scientific methods and technologies. By adopting these scientific methods, farmers as well as the animal husbandry can help us achieve financial strength. In this way we can provide confidence and power to the farmers and also the animal keepers. We should get scientific guidance regarding the direction in which we should move forward and attain success in this area.
My dear countrymen! Do you remember this date, 21st June? Generally, 21st June is remembered as the longest day of the year. But, recently this date has gained a new significance in the world. In September, last year, I had raised a subject and proposed to celebrate 21st June as International Yoga day while addressing the United Nations Assembly. The whole world was astonished, and you will also be surprised to know that within hundred days, we got support from 177 countries and this proposal was successfully passed. In the history of United Nations, such huge numbers of supporters from different countries were seen for the first time. This proposal was passed in a very short span of time, with the support of various countries around the world. This is a proud moment for every Indian.
Now, this is our responsibility. Would we have ever thought that Yoga can act as a connecting link between nations? Vasudhaiv Kutumbakam implies that our ancestors had imagined the same, where Yoga will act as a catalyst in connecting the world. This is news of utmost happiness and pride for us. But to achieve its real significance, we need to project the real essence of Yoga, and its real strength, to the entire world. Yoga connects the heart and mind and acts as a medium for freedom from ailments and lust. I am realizing that Yoga connects the body, mind and knowledge. Now, it is has been widely proven that Yoga can also act as a medium for connecting the world.
Why are we not taking steps to become an ambassador for this venture? Why not move forward in this path of human development with the help of this vital knowledge of Yoga? We must celebrate 21st June as Yoga day, in every corner of India. Please call up your relatives and friends staying in different parts of the world and ask them to gather in groups and celebrate Yoga day. If they have no knowledge of Yoga, ask them to take help from books. Read and explain the importance of Yoga in our lives. You can also read various letters on Yoga. I strongly believe that by declaring Yoga day, we have taken an important step in the development of the world. We have contributed to human development by removing stress from the lives of people, by providing positive energy to those who have lost all hopes in their lives. I want that what world has accepted, what world has respected, and what world has given to India should be a matter of pride, three weeks are left and you should take efforts and join and make others join.
I would especially like to speak to my soldiers of the army, who are fighting for our country’s safety. They have joined the army for their living and have sacrificed their lives for our country. Here, I am not speaking to them as a Prime Minister, but from my inner self, inner truth and deep emotions that I have for my soldiers.
Questions about one-rank and one-pension have not been resolved or answered for over forty years. There is no denial from the truth that the previous governments have spoken about this issue, but have never done something about it. I can assure you, and I have also promised my army men, that my government will surely launch one-rank and one-pension. We know our responsibilities, and after the formation of our government, different departments have begun working on this issue. I used to consider this to be a simple issue, but it is far more complicated than I thought, and for forty years this issue has been delayed. In order to resolve this issue in a simpler direction, I have asked the government officials to find solutions to this problem. It is not necessary to provide information to media every single second. There is no requirement to run a commentary for this issue. I would like to assure you, and I would like to repeat, that our government will launch one-rank and one-Pension and provide solutions to all related issues. Your life is very important to us, owing to the thought-process and ideals, with which we are moving forward.
I would like to connect with you and help you, not just as a part of any government programme, or any political campaign, but as a reflection of my patriotism. I, once again would like to convey to all the soldiers of my country, that we are not one of those people, who, in the name of politics, played games with you for the past forty years. I am against this path, and I am not willing to take any step which would complicate the existing issues. I want you to trust me, even if people are talking against us and playing games in the name of politics. I would like to provide all the assistance to my people who are sacrificing their lives for the country. These are my motives, and I believe that the words from my soul, which is made up of nothing but truth, will touch your heart as well. You have kept your patience intact for forty years. I need some time and opportunity to work. Once again, I would like to assure my countrymen that we will mutually work on this issue and find solutions for the same.
You all must have visited different parts of the country during vacations. Some of you must be planning now to visit places. It is natural that “Seeing is Believing”. When we visit places, we may go to our relatives’ place or go sight-seeing. We get to explore and understand the world. For a person, who has just seen a pond in his village, the experience of seeing an ocean cannot be expressed in words. He is unable to describe the size of ocean in front of the villagers, as seeing is altogether a different experience. When in vacations while you are travelling, with friends or family or planning to go, I do not know if you have the habit of writing a diary while travelling. I believe you must jot down your experiences when you meet new people and, you should write down in words all that influenced you. When you see something, you should describe it in words. In other words, you must assimilate what you see or feel, within you. Travelling is a form of knowledge in itself. It is not possible for all of us to get a chance to climb the Himalayas. One must read the adventurous travel stories through the books written by those who have got a chance to visit the Himalayas.
I am not saying that you should become a writer. We should travel and write to learn something new, to understand our country, and to know its varied diversity. We can write about a particular place, the food-habits of the people there, their clothing style, language, and culture, and also about their dreams, aspirations and problems. We are living in this vast nation. If we want to understand the entire nation, one life is not enough to do this. It is my earnest request to all of you, who are planning to visit or travel, to share your travelling experiences with me. I would be glad to read your stories. I would request you to mail me your photo and your experience with Incredible India#, and I will share your impressive stories with others.
I would like to feel what you have experienced. I would to like see from far, what you have seen during your travel. You can visit a sea shore and take a walk alone. Though I may be unable to do this, by reading your story, I would love to share your vivid experience with others.
On this note, let me remind you once again, please take care of yourself and do not fall sick. There are many ways to protect yourself from the summer heat, but please take care of the birds and animals around you too. I have spoken all that came out of my heart. I will meet you all again, and will speak again. My heartfelt greetings to one and all.
Thank you all for your support.
#DELIMITER#
22 5 2016, India
Golden Jubilee of Ramdhari singh dinkar
Respected  family members of Dinkar ji and the literature loving brothers and sisters.
It is a privilege for me to participate as a worshipper on the occasion of the prayers for “Shabd Brahm” (The divine). In our culture, the ‘Shabd’ is treated as ‘Brahm’ (God). Its capacity is as powerful as the almighty God.
The celebration of the 50 years of literary journey of Dinkar jee is not merely due to the fact that 50 years have elapsed. Even after 50 years, his creative works continue to be a source of inspiration for us and for the future generations alike. They view it with the same reverence and that is how it is worth all the respect.
Those creating literature are known as litterateur because literature is a passion for them. In the real sense, they are like saints. Whatever we have read about the sages in the Vedas and the Upanishads, they represent the same era. They are visionaries, observe the society closely,  weigh its various dimensions, mould the viewpoints and help us find a solution.
Dinkar ji’s entire literature is associated with the farmers and their livelihood. It is about the poor and the villages. The creations find an audience, sometimes it touches the heart of the young, the elderly, men, women, sometimes a specific land area or a specific incident. Some of his creations have the ability to reach everyone from young to the old. They can relate to the past, present and the future. They touch the lives of not just those who read them but they resonate with the future generations as well. Such is the power of the writings of Dinkar Ji.
Jai Prakash Narayan ji who revolutionized India was much older as compared to the young generation, and Dinkar ji’s poems were like as a bridge between the two. Everyone is aware that that in the fight against corruption, the poems of Dinkarji which Prasoon ji just sang, would inspire the youth and awaken the country. He would not let the society be a mute spectator. Not only this , he won’t sleep in peace, as long as the society slept. He wanted to keep the society alert by awakening its conscience and by revolutionizing its spirit. He did not find freedom in mere self expression. He wanted that the flame inside him should spread everywhere, but he did not visualize it as a destructive force capable of burning everything, but as an inspirational light that would guide the future generations. This is a rarity.
I am a worshipper of Goddess Saraswati and hence I am able to experience the power of the spoken word. I know how some words can be so powerful so as to change the course of lives and I can very well feel that strength within me. As a worshipper and a priest I know that Dinkar Ji has given us an invaluable gift and we will have to see how we take it forward to future generations.
I sometimes feel that in our country there might be thousands of poets and lovers of literature in every generation. I believe that there might be literature lover in thousands who might be reciting Dinkar ji’s creations by heart. This by no means is a small achievement. Some people recite the shlokas from Ramayana, Mahabharata, Vedas and Upanishads. Similarly there might be others who would be orally reciting Dinkar ji’s words. They might be finding pleasure in the same, in lending voice to Dinkar ji’s creations. They might be thinking that people may or may not hear me but the world will definitely hear Dinkar Ji.
Dinkar Ji created “Parshuram Ki Pratiksha. His creations had inputs from history as well as cultural sensitivities, the greatness demonstrated by India at various points and the capacity to imbibe everything. The way Dinkar Ji experienced it is reflected time and again through his creations. And this way we can open insightful windows through his literature into an understanding of India. If we have the potential we can open doors too.  But if there is no potential, we can at least open the windows. Dinkar ji has laid the foundation of such a potential amongst us.
Dinkar ji told us a few things but perhaps we like to forget them, and people forget them. Time and again, some vices creep into the society. They are different every time. Someone tried once to be close to Dinkar ji citing that he belonged to the same caste. He wanted Dinkar ji to support him. This happens many a times in the society. But in such situations too, how apt was his thinking, we get a glimpse of it, otherwise most people fall prey to such things. Dinkar Ji was member of the Rajya Sabha and had a chance to both view and experience politics closely, yet he kept himself aloof from such an environment.  He wrote a letter to the gentleman in 1961 that  the only way out to improve the situation in Bihar is that people should forget their caste and come together to respect the merit.  Remember the state does not run on the support of one or two castes. It requires the support of many, and if we fail to rise above casteism then the social fabric of Bihar will rot. The  letter written in 1961, till date gives such an inspirational message for Bihar. These are not the words of a person in politics nor are they the words of a poet or literary person. They are the words of a saint like man who could pre empt the future and who was worried about Bihar’s future. And that is why his words had the power to clearly indicate his intentions to the people of his society.
If Bihar has to move forward, if Bihar has to move ahead, then realize one thing, unless the eastern end of India develops, India cannot surge ahead. The western end however rich it is, cannot make a difference until the eastern end of India joins the road to development. Our motherland cannot realize its true potential till then.  It is our dream that the eastern end becomes equal to the western end and there is no reason why it cannot do so. If Bihar, Bengal, Assam, North Eastern states all rise and move forward then the world will watch in amazement, the progress made by India.
Dinkar Ji also had dreamt of the development of Bihar. Bihar should be glorious, progressive and prosperous. Bihar may earn its own glory and pride and not borrow it from someone else. It has the potential; it just needs opportunities to become prosperous. Bihar has the strength, which given a chance it can leave everyone behind in the race.
We are committed to fulfill Dinkar Ji’s dream. The journey of 50 years of his creations still inspires us to do something, not merely recite his verses. It inspires us to achieve something, so today, in this auditorium, remembering his literary creations, we should see this as an opportunity to recommit ourselves. May his blessings remain with us so that we may fulfill our commitments and move forward to the realization of the dreams of Bihar?
With these expectations I would like to thank you all for giving me the opportunity to be with you, to meet the family members. I consider myself very fortunate.
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
19 5 2015, Seoul
Asian Leadership Conference Seoul
Her Excellency President Park Geun-hye, 
Her Highness Sheikha Mozah 
His Excellency Mr. Ban ki-moon, 
Mr. Bang Sang-hoon, President of Chosun-ilbo
It is a great honour to share the stage with President Park and Sheikha Mozah and Ban Ki Moon. 
They are outstanding leaders of Asia. They reflect Asia's diversity, and its common spirit. 
I am delighted to visit Republic of Korea in the first year of my Government. 
Long before Korean brands had found their way into Indian homes, Koreans had found their way into Indian hearts. 
Nearly a hundred years ago, India's great poet, Rabindranath Tagore called Korea the Lamp of the East. Today, Korea is proving him right. 
Korea's economic miracle and global leadership in technology has made the promise of the Asian Century more real. 
Korea is a pillar of democracy and a force of stability in Asia and Pacific. 
Asia's re-emergence is the greatest phenomenon of our era. 
It started in Japan and then extended to China, Korea and Southeast Asian nations. 
In the West, nations like Qatar are transforming their desert landscapes into booming economies. 
It is now India's turn to sustain Asia's success. 
It is a nation of 1.25 billion people blessed with the extraordinary resources in the form of 800 million youth. 
India's potential has never been in doubt. And, in the course of the past year, we are translating promise into a reality; hope into confidence. 
India's growth has rebounded to 7.5% per year; and, the prospects of further increase are strong. 
The world speaks in one voice that India is the new bright spot of hope for our region and the world. 
The progress of one-sixth of humanity will also be an opportunity for the world. 
It will also give India the capacity to do more for our world. 
Above all, India's progress will be an Asian success story. And, it will help make our Asian dream a bigger reality. 
This is because Asia will succeed more when all of Asia rises together. 
Asia must not have two faces – one of hope and prosperity; the other of want and despair. 
It must not be a continent of nations on the rise and others in decline; of regions with stability and others with broken institutions. 
India seeks an Asia of shared prosperity, where the success of one nation becomes the strength of the other. 
Growth must be more inclusive within and across nations. This is the obligation of national governments, but also a regional responsibility. 
That is why the future I dream for India is also the future I want for our neighbours. 
As some of us in Asia become more prosperous , we must be prepared to share our resources and markets with those who need them. 
I am pleased to see many in Asia assume that responsibility. 
This is the principle that guides India's policies. And, it comes from our timeless belief in the world as one family “Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam” 
We must also empower our youth with skills and education, so that they can look to the future with hope. 
Over the next 40 years, three billion Asians will lift themselves into a higher level of prosperity. Asia's prosperity and rising population will place a huge demand on our limited resources.
So, our footprint on earth must become lighter as our economic weight increases. 
That is why I have often called for a change in lifestyle and new pathways to prosperity. And, I believe it is possible, without compromising our future. 
Asia must also use its capacity for innovation and frugal manufacturing for affordable renewable energy. 
Reverence for nature is part of our shared heritage. Combating climate change is in our enlightened self-interest. 
That is why India has set a goal of 175 Giga Watts of new renewable energy capacity over the next five years. 
But, coal and oil will remain the key source of energy for all of us for a long time to come. So, let us work together to make them cleaner and less harmful for Nature. 
Our vision of inclusive growth will be incomplete unless we pool our innovation and technologies to transform our region's agriculture. 
Many of us have similar ecosystems and rural economies. And, we have a long history of learning from each other. 
By 2025, a majority of Asians will live in cities. Many urban clusters in Asia will exceed the population of mid-sized countries elsewhere in the world. By then, by some estimates, India will host around 11% of the global urban population. 
So, creating livable and sustainable cities of tomorrow should be our collective goal. 
That is why in India, I have placed so much emphasis on urban renewal and smart cities. And, there is much that we can learn from cities like Seoul. 
If Asia must rise as one, Asia should no longer think of itself in regional fragments. Today, what happens in West Asia has a strong impact on East Asia. And what happens on the oceans will have influence on the Asian highlands. 
India is located at Asia's crossroads. And, we will assume our responsibility to build an inter-connected Asia. 
We must connect our regions through infrastructure and integrate them through trade and investments. 
We must also do everything possible to secure lasting peace and stability for Asia. 
This year, as we observe the 100th and 70th anniversary of the two wars, we should remember that peace is not inevitable.
We must build institutions that promote cooperation on the principles of equality, co-existence and international rules and norms. 
This will also mean that we work together to safeguard our commons for the benefit of all – our oceans, outer space and the cyber space. 
This is a responsibility of each nation towards one another. 
It is also our collective task against our common challenges –terrorism; trans-national crimes; natural disasters; and, diseases. 
Asia of dynamism, but also of uncertainties must lead in shaping its course. 
But, Asia of growing weight will also have to take greater responsibility for the world. 
And, it must also seek a larger role in global affairs.
We must work as Asians to reform the global institutions of governance, including the United Nations and its Security Council. 
Asia of rivalries will hold us back. Asia of unity will shape the world. 
In conclusion, I wish to say this. 
Through its history, Asia has been linked by the flow of religions, culture, knowledge and trade. 
And, Asia has also given much to the world – great religions, our staples such as tea and rice, some of the finest human creations, and some of the most significant inventions and technologies. 
We have risen from tragic conflicts and the long shadow of colonialism. 
We have also seen Asia's strength and spirit. 
Let us now draw upon our heritage and synergies, our ancient wisdom and youthful energy, to pursue a common purpose. 
For ourselves and the world. 
Thank you. Thank you very much. Thanks a lot.
#DELIMITER#
18 5 2015, Seoul
Press briefing with Seoul president
Excellency, President Park Geun-hye, 
Members of the Media, 
It is a great pleasure to visit Republic of Korea. I sincerely thank President Park for the warm welcome and hospitality. 
I had excellent discussions with President Park today. Her own visit to India in January 2014 had a big impact on our relations. 
I am pleased to visit Republic of Korea in the first year of my Government. I have visited here before as Chief Minister. 
Korea's economic rise had left me deeply impressed. In the short time since then, Korea's global leadership in manufacturing and technology has become more visible. 
Korea is also a strong pillar of democracy in Asia. 
Korea's rapid progress has made the vision of an Asian century stronger.
It will be based not only on the strength of Korea's economy, but also its contribution to peace and stability in the region. 
We consider Korea a crucial partner in India's economic modernization. 
I am here at a time of renewed momentum in the Indian economy. We are pursuing a comprehensive programme of economic modernization that covers all sectors of our economy and all aspects of policies and procedures. 
We have a special focus on infrastructure and developing a world class manufacturing sector. Korea can be a leading partner in this enterprise. 
Our relationship started with a strong economic emphasis. But, it has also now become strategic in content. 
The need for closer engagement between countries with shared values and vision has never been stronger. 
For all these reasons, this is a very important visit for me. 
I am pleased that we have agreed to upgrade the bilateral relationship to ‘Special Strategic Partnership’. 
The decisions today reflect how seriously we take the new framework of our relationship. Republic of Korea is the second country with which India will have a diplomatic and security dialogue in 2+2 format. 
I welcome the decision to have regular cooperation between our national security councils. 
We have also agreed to expand cooperation between our armed forces. 
We intend to deepen our cooperation in defence technology and manufacture of defence equipment in India. This sector offers huge opportunities in India. 
I have requested President Park to support the participation of Korean companies in the defence sector in India. Her response has been positive. 
We had extensive discussions on our economic relations. 
Many Korean brands are household names in India. President Park and I see vast opportunities for Korean companies to participate in our ‘Make in India’ Mission. I will meet Korea's business leaders tomorrow. Korean companies have the edge to succeed in India. 
We will also establish a channel – Korea Plus – to facilitate their investment and operations in India. 
I sought President Park's support for participation of Korean companies in new areas. 
Besides defence equipment, I invited Korean investments in areas like ship building, including LNG tankers. 
Our decision to establish a Joint Working Group on shipbuilding reflects our seriousness to cooperate in this area. Korean companies will be participating in India's plans to acquire and manufacture LNG tankers. Tomorrow, I will visit a shipyard in Ulsan. 
President Park and I shared the view that our modest trade is well below its potential. We agreed to review the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement and other market access related issues. I conveyed our desire to see a balanced and broad-based growth in bilateral trade. 
We also had productive discussions on international issues. 
I welcomed Korea’s diplomatic efforts to maintain peace and stability of the Korean Peninsula. I also shared her concerns that proliferation of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction will not be in the interest of countries of the region. I offered India’s support to Korean people for peaceful re-unification of Korean Peninsula. 
We discussed our engagement in the East Asia Summit and with ASEAN. We have a shared interest in an open, balanced and inclusive regional architecture. We have common views on maritime security in this region. 
We agreed to work together and with other countries in the region to ensure the freedom of navigation and safety and security of sea lanes of communication. Challenges of cyber security and terrorism are also areas of interest to both of us. 
The visit to Korea has just begun, but it is already very productive. We have laid the foundation for a relationship that two major Asian countries with shared values should have. 
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
17 5 2015, Mongolia
Banquet speech
Excellency, Prime Minister Chimad Saikhanbileg,
Members of the Cabinet, 
Distinguished guests,
This is a memorable day for India, for my delegation and me.
In less than 24 hours, we have experienced true friendship.
We have seen rare grace and generosity of a great people.
We have experienced the beauty of your land.
We have nurtured our spiritual links. The visit to the Ganden monastery will be a source of joy forever.
We have soaked in the richness of your culture at the mini-Nadam festival.
We have seen the unity of spirit of our two nations and two people. I have seen thousands of Indians come together, when I have travelled to different cities.
For the first time, I have seen thousands of people of the host nation come together. And, that too, for an event based on India's ancient tradition.
Today, 1.25 billion people of India and the world have come to see the strength and the spirit of our relationship.
Ours is a relationship that is not measured on the scale of commerce or driven by competition against others.
It is a relationship of immeasurable positive energy that comes from our spiritual links and shared ideals.
It is the energy that seeks the well being of our two nations and the common good of the world.
This is a form of energy that has enormous power to be the force of peace, progress and prosperity in the world.
It is a force that can unite the world and direct our thoughts and efforts to the well being of the weak and the poor.
It can help preserve our beautiful planet.
The importance of a journey is not measured by the distance covered, but by the destination reached.
The visit may be short. But, the outcomes are substantive and significant.
In the course of one day, we have imparted our ancient relations new strength and momentum.
Our political understanding and commitment have become stronger. Our economic cooperation has scaled new heights. Our security cooperation has expanded.
The ties of hearts and minds have deepened.
Excellency, all this would not have been possible without the great leaders of Mongolia.
You have guided Mongolia through the turbulence that comes from transitions in history.
You have chosen the path of democracy. You have rekindled the spiritual heritage of your land.
You have guided Mongolia's international relationships with great wisdom.
Excellency, your personal leadership and guidance for this visit has made it a big success.
Your presence today at so many events added great sheen to them. It spoke of the special bonds between our countries.
This is a bond that will be the eternal flame of light and hope for our people and our world.
So, as we celebrate 25 years of democracy in Mongolia and 60 years of our diplomatic relations, we know that the best for relationship lies ahead of us.
With those words, let me raise a toast
- To the health and well being of the Prime Minister of Mongolia, His Excellency, Prime Minister Saikhanbileg
- To the progress and prosperity of our spiritual neighbours of Mongolia
- To the everlasting friendship between the people of India and Mongolia.
#DELIMITER#
17 5 2015, mongolia
Mongolian Parliament
Your Excellency President of Mongolia,
Your Excellency Chairman of Great Hural of Mongolia,                                                      
Your Excellency Prime Minister of Mongolia, 
Honourable Members of Parliament, 
Honourable Members of Diplomatic Corp,
I am delighted to visit Mongolia, a country of great people. Your country reminds us how beautiful this world is. It is truly a great honour to speak to the Great Hural. It is a special privilege to do so in the 25th year of democracy in Mongolia. You are the new bright light of democracy in our world.
I am deeply grateful for your generosity in hosting me on a Sunday. I am humbled by the warmth of the welcome and your wonderful hospitality. ;Everything that I see and experience here speaks clearly of unlimited goodwill for India.  
I bring the greetings of your 1.25 billion spiritual neighbours. There is no higher form of a relationship; no bonds more sacred than this. We in India are honoured that you think of us this way.
As in the life of a human being, in the life of a nation, too, few things are as precious as the gift of friendship. So, I speak for my entire nation to say that we deeply cherish the friendship of the Mongol people.
India and Mongolia are at an important milestone. We are celebrating sixty years of diplomatic relations. But, our ties are timeless in spirit.
Around two thousand years ago, monks from India crossed difficult terrain and long distance to spread the message of Lord Buddha in this enchanting land. Many went from here to the hot tropics of India in search of spiritual knowledge.
Centuries ago, when our horizons  and our mobility were limited, the great Mongols united Asia and Europe. Their stories of courage, daring and adventure continue to captivate human imagination around the world. Their impact on human history has been profound.
In the winding course of history, our own cultures, literature and art became interconnected. And, it continues to shine in the richness of India's diversity and culture.
Today Indians and Mongolians are telling the world that the bonds of hearts and minds have the strength to overcome the barriers of distance. That bond thrives through the monks from Mongolia who come to India each year for spiritual learning; and, the hundreds of others who go there for education and training.
It lives through the work of Kushok Bakula Rinpoche India's Ambassador here from 1990 to 2000. The Pethub Monastery that he established here will be an enduring symbol of our links.
In the popularity of the yoga in Mongolia, we see the unity of our spirit.
Five decades ago, we stood firmly with you, as you sought membership of the United Nations as a proud and sovereign nation. In turn, time and again, you have stood in solidarity with us, in the United Nations and elsewhere.
While the human bonds have been strong, our economic ties have been modest. But, I have no doubt that our relations will progress along every avenue of the new age. It will draw strength from India's economic growth.
A year ago, a nation of 1.25 billion people voted for change and progress in the largest democratic election in human history. We have worked with speed, resolve and ambition to fulfill our pledge.
In less than a year, our growth has rebounded to 7.5%.India has emerged as one of the fastest growing major economies in the world. And, we have the potential to grow even faster.
At a time when the global economy remains weak, the world speaks in one voice that India is the bright spot of hope to become the new locomotive for global economic momentum.
We are conscious that our challenges are vast across India's immense social and economic diversity. But, we have faith in our sound policies and good governance.
We draw confidence from the unity of our nation and the common purpose of our people. Even more, we get our energy from the aspirations of a young India, with 800 million youth under the age of 35 years. They are eager to pursue their dreams and confident in their ability to do so.
So, as we transform the lives of our people, we also create opportunities for the world. And, we increase our ability to help our friends. This is the urge of the land of Buddha and Gandhi. This is the instinct born from our ancient belief in the world as one family.
As the Indian economy adds strength to our region and the world, it will also benefit Mongolia.
Mongolia's economic growth is also impressive. So, our bilateral ties will also grow, despite the distance and demands of geography.
Mongolia’s rich mineral resources can fuel our partnership. And, I hope that location will not be a constraint on Mongolia’s right to choose its partners.
We can seize the economic opportunities of the digital world and work together to make it more secure against growing cyber threats. We can use India’s expertise in dairy to launch a white revolution on these vast steppes. We can work together to add value to Mongolia's pashmina resources right here. We can create partnerships for affordable modern healthcare in Mongolia. We can use our heritage of traditional medicines to improve holistic treatment in our countries and abroad. As Indians travel abroad more, Mongolia has the opportunity, with its natural and spiritual wealth, to become a major destination for them.
More than just trade and investment, our development partnership is a reflection of our shared ideals and vision. I believe that the greatest form of this partnership is investment in the development of human resources and institutions.
This gives a nation its own capacity to shoulder the responsibility for its progress. It enhances its independence of choice. And, it makes progress more sustainable.
We remain deeply committed to this vision.
Today, I will lay the foundation stone for the expansion and upgrading of the Atal Bihari Vajpayee Centre for Excellence in Information and Communication Technology.
Under India's training programme, Mongolia is one of our largest partners. We will increase the ITEC training slots for Mongolia from 150 to 200. We will also establish an India-Mongolia Joint School.
Later today, I will hand over the Bhabhatron equipment that can help treat cancer in Mongolia. This will be the first demonstration of our cooperation in the civil nuclear sector.
Finally, today I conveyed to Prime Minister our decision to provide one billion U.S. dollars Line of Credit to develop institutions, infrastructure and human resources in Mongolia.
Our security cooperation is growing. We can learn a great deal from each other. No one can doubt the well-known skills of Mongols! We are proud to conduct defence exercises together. And, I am pleased that we have signed agreements today to cooperate more closely on border security and cyber security.
We have also agreed that India will help establish a cyber security centre in Mongolia’s defence and security establishment. But, the real strength of our relationship lies in the goodwill between our people and in the faith that unites us across the distances. It is a power that can do more than just draw our two countries closer. It can help advance peace, stability and prosperity in Asia and the Pacific Region.
There was a time when the messengers of Lord Buddha linked Asia with his message of love and compassion. The shifting sands of time have not buried their footprints, because the value of their message never diminishes.
Wherever I have travelled in Asia - from the edge of Pacific to the centre of the Indian Ocean; from the sea shores of Southeast Asia to the lofty heights of the Himalaya; from the thick forests of the tropics to the expanse of these steppes - I see thriving monuments and temples dedicated to Lord Buddha.
The eight-fold path of Lord Buddha prescribes not just the path to happiness of individuals, but also a guide to the well being of societies and nations. It is a message of kindness, love and compassion for all. It is a lesson of deepest respect for human beings and human rights; for faith in peace and non-violence. This is a path that tells us to reach out to the weakest and the poorest in our societies. It is a wisdom that sees the inter-dependence of all things in the universe and the virtue of simplicity. Therefore, it is a path to a more a sustainable planet.
It holds lessons for the world that is threatened by the excesses of consumption and disharmony between man and nature. As in the prosperous West, Asia of rising incomes and aspirations must remember and follow this message. Above all, it is a guide for a relationship of peace, equality, respect and cooperation between nations, small and large, weak and powerful.
It is a call for each of us, as individuals and as nations, to assume the universal responsibility to mankind and our planet. It inspires us to think of common good of all nations. The teachings of Lord Buddha are reflected in the principles of democracy.
The path of righteousness is based on freedom of mind, liberty of thought, liberty of action and liberty of speech. These are the foundations of democracy. It is defined by recognition of inter-dependence, acceptance of diversity and belief in co- existence.
Its essence is the freedom of human beings, faith in dialogue, rule of law, and resolution of differences through peaceful means. So, if we follow the Right Path of the master, it will also be natural to walk on the path of democratic values.
Here, in Mongolia, we see the union of these two ideals.
I say this to Asia:
Whatever forms of government each nation chooses, however we define ourselves as a State, we can still apply the principles of democracy in our engagement with each other.
Whatever path we have chosen, whatever be the history of our disputes, or the nature of our claims, we are linked by the common spiritual heritage across a vast arc of Asia.
The convergence of Buddhism and democracy provides us a path to build an Asia of peace and cooperation, harmony and equality.
This is a region that has woken up to its destiny. No region in the world has seen so much progress in the last half century as Asia. No age has seen transformation on such scale in one generation as our continent.
This is a region of ancient wisdom and youthful dynamism It is a continent that is expected to lead the world in the 21st century. Yet, this is also a ;region that lives on the uneasy edge of uncertainty, of unsettled questions, of unresolved disputes and unforgotten memories.
Across Asia’s diversity, we also see growing disparity of hope and opportunities. Asia has given much to the world through the ages. It now has the responsibility to shape its future.
So, now more than our own requirements, I am sure we will be able to do the requirements that Asia wants from us and the world thinks about us. And I am sure that with our spiritual background, and our extraordinary quality of the mind, we can serve the world and society.
And I am sure that the path of righteousness is paved with the freedom of mind, liberty and thought. I am sure that whatever we have decided, and in this widening course of history, our own cultures, literature and art become interconnected and it continues to sign in the richness of India’s diversity and culture. Today Indians and Mongolians are telling the world that the bonds of hearts and minds have the strength to overcome the barriers of distances.
This is a token of our reverence for our shared spiritual heritage and respect for our friendship.
As the sapling grows, it will be an emblem of our growing partnership.
In time, it should also become a symbol of humanism in the world and conservation of our planet.
I thank you once again. Thank you.
May happiness be bestowed on all.
When I entered the parliament, I saw its symbol, I found a special connection with this Parliament. The symbol is a lotus. You will be happy to know that my party’s symbol is also lotus. So it is a very special connection with you.
Thank you very much.
#DELIMITER#
17 5 2015, mongolia
joint press statement with mongolian prime minister
Your Excellency Prime Minister Saikhanbileg 
Distinguished members of Mongolian delegation, 
Members of the media, 
I am delighted to visit Mongolia. It is a great honour to be the first Prime Minister of India to do so. 
It is a special privilege to come on the occasion of two important milestones that unite us – 25 years of democracy in Mongolia and 60 years of diplomatic relations between our two countries. 
I am deeply grateful for your welcome and hospitality that have touched our hearts. You have embraced us with unlimited generosity and warmth of a true friend. 
Your Parliament's decision to host me on a Sunday is a remarkable gesture of honour for India.
I could not have started my visit in a better way. It began with a visit to the historic Gandan Monastery, where I handed over a sapling of the Mahabodhi Tree. This is a token of friendship from the people of India. 
I am here in respect and appreciation for our timeless kinship. You have called us your spiritual neighbour and third neighbour. We will always fulfil the responsibility that comes with this honour. 
Today, Mongolia is also an integral part of India's Act East Policy. The destinies of India and Mongolia are closely linked with the future of Asia Pacific Region. We can work together to help advance peace, stability and prosperity in this region. So, I am also here in commitment to our shared responsibility to our region. 
Prime Minister has spoken eloquently about the relationship and our meeting today. I will have the honour to speak about our vision in the Parliament a little later. 
I was very pleased with my discussions with Prime Minister today. We have strong convergence of views on bilateral relations and our regional and international partnership. 
The agreements that we have just signed speak to the depth of the relationship. These cover economic relations, development partnership, defence and security, and people-to-people contacts. 
We will take our economic partnership to a new level. Today, I am pleased to announce that India will provide a Line of Credit of One Billion U.S. dollars to support expansion of Mongolia's economic capacity and infrastructure. 
Supporting development of human resources is the best way to secure a nation's development. We reiterated our commitment to continue our efforts in Mongolia. India will increase the ITEC training slots for Mongolia from 150 to 200. We will also establish an India-Mongolia Joint School.
 
 Later today I will have the pleasure to lay the foundation stone for the expansion and upgrading of the Atal Bihari Vajpayee Center of Excellence for Information and Communication Technology. I will also visit the National Cancer Centre to gift Bhabhatron II. It is state of art nuclear medicine cancer therapy machine, developed and manufactured in India. 
We attach high importance to our security cooperation. We will continue to participate in each other's defence exercises. The agreements today will deepen our cooperation in border security and cyber security. Cooperation between National Security Councils will provide a strategic framework for cooperation. We have also agreed that India will help establish a cyber security centre in Mongolia’s defence and security establishment. 
Our trade and investment relations are modest. We recognise that there are physical limitations. But, we agreed that economic growth in our two countries is opening up new opportunities. There is huge potential in civil nuclear sector, mining, healthcare, pharmaceuticals and dairy. We should also explore the possibilities of using digital technology to expand our economic relations. 
I conveyed to Prime Minister that we greatly value our international partnership, which is based on our friendship, shared spiritual heritage and democratic values. These also provide solid foundation for our cooperation in our region. 
I conveyed India's sincere appreciation for Mongolia's strong support for India's permanent membership of United Nations Security Council. 
In a reflection of our commitment to further deepen our relationship, we have decided to upgrade our Comprehensive Partnership to ‘Strategic Partnership’. We also agreed to renew our Treaty of Friendly Relations and Cooperation. 
So, at a significant milestone in our relationship, we are starting a new era in our partnership. 
I keenly look forward to the rest of my stay in Mongolia. Thank you. 
#DELIMITER#
16 5 2015, China
launch of centre for gandhian and indian studies at fudan university
All the dignitaries’ present and dear student friends, 
This is a moment of great happiness for me as I am going to be a part of that pious job which will instill a sense of pride for centuries to come. There might be a few leaders in the world that would have an opportunity to interact with the students of two universities in such a short span of three days while visiting other countries as a guest. Very few people might be as fortunate as I am and I am grateful to you for this.
The basics of India is philosophy and it is also mentioned in the Vedas that the light of knowledge should flow free from all directions. Our philosophy enunciates “Gyan Bhadro”. Thoughts and knowledge knows no boundaries, neither east or west. They are eternal and knowledge from any part of the world can be useful for the development of human culture. 
Just now, two Chinese students quoted different Slokas from the ancient Indian texts. They said and I quote “Nainam Chindanti Shastrani Nainam Dahti Pavakaha”. They presented their views in a manner which can act as a storehouse of knowledge for the world. The soul is never born, the soul never dies. The soul cannot be destroyed nor can it ever be burnt. I understand that the Chinese students here summed up the ancient Indian philosophy before you. They mentioned “The Gita” too which states “ma faleshu kadachina” meaning to do ones duty wholeheartedly without seeking anything in return. It requires intent to study about Mahatma Gandhi or India. And if India and China were to scan the history of their rich cultural heritage, we will discover that both were nations of ardent learners, they were courageous to gain new knowledge and were ready to take pains for it. Huen Tsang came to India some 1400 years ago and similarly academic Indians must have travelled to China and all for the sake of knowledge. Such boldness was displayed to acquire knowledge, to learn about different cultures and traditions. It is easy to open the doors for trade and economic reasons. It is easy to invite tourists from all over the world. But opening the doors for knowledge requires immense courage. If one is not strong internally then one is scared of being engulfed by the ideas of others. Will those ideas overpower us? When a person is strong within, he is open to the views and ideas of others. And so China today after the age of Buddha is keen to learn about the great cultural heritage through the life of Gandhi, I think this in itself is a big and important event.
Those relations that are borne out of economic considerations are profit and loss centric. But the relations that are fostered through knowledge, work on the principle of welfare of the future generations. Mahatma Gandhi, though born in a corner of India was a global figure, he was an icon and the various crises that the world is struggling with, can his ideologies show a way out? The world today is facing two major crises – one is global warming and the other is terrorism. Gandhi’s ideologies have solution to both these problems, which means the students of this university through Gandhian Study can outline the relevance of Gandhi in today’s age through mankind not just for China but for the world. A Chinese person Mr. Zen Centi, admired Gandhi and came to live in Sabarmati Ashram in 1925. He stayed there as Gandhiji’s disciple. The Ashram inmates could not pronounce his name correctly for it was a Chinese name. So Mahatma Gandhi wrote his name as Shanti Jain. 
Similarly a Chinese scholar Tang Yung – Shan was close to Rabindra Nath Tagore. He has written that when he met Mahatma Gandhi, Gandhiji was full of praise for China. 
Zen Centi after staying with Mahatma Gandhi returned to China and started a newspaper by the name Penang. In 1930 Gandhiji was fighting a big battle for India’s independence. He was lodged in Yerwada jail in Pune and was on a fast unto death in the jail. When Zen Centi learned about it, he immediately came to India and requested to meet Gandhiji. Gandhiji had refused to meet anyone inside the jail during his fast. But such was his love for Zen Centi that Gandhiji met him in the jail. Such was his love for a Chinese citizen. 
21st Century belongs to Asia. China and India together make for a third of the world’s population. If this one third population is benefitted and is free of problems, then a third of the world will be freed of crises. So India and China should together scale new heights, with humanitarian approach, with humanity, based on Buddhist ideology and Gandhian experiments, so that we can inspire the world to lead a life which is committed to the welfare of the world.
My heartfelt congratulations to Fudan University towards their efforts to start this new segment. I believe that our thoughts will enhance and strengthen the Indo Chinese relations in the times to come for the coming generations. With this belief my best wishes to all of you once again.
Thank you very much.
#DELIMITER#
15 5 2015, China
address at tsinghua university
Qiu Yong, President of Tsinghua University 
Foreign Minister Wang Yi 
Shi Yigong, Assistant President of Tsinghua University 
I am truly delighted to be at the Tsinghua University today. 
You are a world class institution. You are a symbol of success of China's education sector. 
You are the foundation for China's economic miracle. You have produced great leaders, including President Xi. 
It is not surprising that China's economic growth and its new leadership in research, science and technology have taken place together. 
I particularly like the old Chinese saying, If you think in terms of a year, plant a seed; if you think in terms of ten years, plant trees; if you think in terms of 100 years, teach the people. 
In India, too, the ancient saying is vyaye krate vardhate eva nityam, vidhya dhanam sarva dhan pradhanam 
The wealth that increases by giving, That wealth is knowledge and is supreme of all possessions. 
This is one example of how our two nations are united in their timeless wisdom. 
There is much more, though, that links our two ancient civilizations. 
I began my journey in China in Xian. In doing so, I retraced the footsteps of the Chinese monk Xuanzang. 
He travelled to India from Xian in the seventh century in search of knowledge and returned to Xian as a friend and chronicler of India. 
President Xi's visit in India last September started from Ahmedabad. It is not far from Vadnagar, my birthplace, but important, because it hosted Xuanzang and many pilgrims from China. 
The world's first large scale educational exchange programme took place between India and China during the Tang Dynasty. 
Records talk of about 80 Indian monks coming to China and nearly 150 Chinese monks returning after their education in India. And yes, this was in the 10th and 11th century. 
Mumbai's rise as a port and a shipbuilding centre is because of cotton trade with China. 
And, those who love silk and textiles know that India's famous tanchoi sarees owe themselves to three brothers from my state of Gujarat who learnt the art of weaving from Chinese masters in the 19th century. 
And, in an unquestionable evidence of our ancient trade, silk in our classical Sanskrit language is called Cinapatta. 
So, the centuries-old story of our relations has been of spiritualism, learning, art and trade. 
It is a picture of respect for each other's civilisation and of shared prosperity. 
It is reflected in the human values of Dr. Dwarkanath Kotnis, a doctor from India, who treated soldiers in China during the Second World War. 
Today, after difficult and sometimes dark passages of history, India and China stand at a rare moment of vast and multiple transitions in the world. 
Perhaps, the most significant change of this era is the re-emergence of China and India. 
The world's two most populous nations are undergoing economic and social transformation on a scale and at a speed that is unmatched in history. 
China's success over the past three decades has changed the character of the global economy. 
India is now the next frontier of the economic revolution. 
We have the demography for it. About 800 million people in India are below the age of 35 years. Their aspirations, energy, enterprise and skills will be the force for India's economic transformation. 
We now have the political mandate and the will to make it happen. 
Over the past year, we have moved with a clear and coherent vision. And, we have acted with speed, resolve and boldness to implement it. 
We have taken sweeping steps to reform our policies and open up more to foreign direct investments. This includes new areas like insurance, construction, defence and railways. 
We are eliminating unnecessary regulations and simplifying our procedures. We are using digital technology to eliminate multiple approvals and endless wait. 
We are building a tax regime that is predictable, stable and competitive, and that will integrate the Indian market. 
We are scaling up investments in next generation infrastructure – roads, ports, railways, airports, telecom, digital networks and clean energy. 
Our resources are being allocated with speed and transparency. And, we will make sure that land acquisition does not become a barrier to growth or a burden on farmers. 
We are creating the global skill pool to establish a modern economy with a world class manufacturing sector. 
We are reviving our agriculture sector to restore the fortunes of our farmers and boost our growth. 
Like China, urban renewal is both a necessity and a means to add energy to our economy. 
We are combining traditional strategies with modern economic instruments to eliminate poverty and create security for the poor. 
We have launched major schemes on financial inclusion of all, providing funds to the un-banked, and ensuring efficient and direct transfer of benefits to the poor.And, we are ensuring that insurance and pension schemes reach the poorest. 
We have set time bound goals for providing access to housing, water and sanitation for all. 
This won't just transform lives, but also generate a new source of economic momentum. 
Above all, we are changing the way we govern ourselves – not just in the way we work in New Delhi, but also in the way we work together with state governments, districts and cities. 
Because we know, as you do, that our vision may be formed in Delhi, but our success will be determined by state capitals. 
That is why I am here today with two Chief Ministers, which is a new aspect of our foreign policy. And, for the first time for India, Premier Li and I will sit with provincial leaders and chief ministers to discuss our partnership. 
I know that rewriting policies can be easier than changing mindsets and work culture. But, we are on the right path. 
You will feel the change in India. And, you can see it in our growth rate. It has now increased to 7.5%, and we are encouraged by international experts speak in one voice of higher growth rates. 
In many ways, our two countries reflect the same aspirations, similar challenges and the same opportunities. 
We can be inspired by each other's successes. 
And, in the global uncertainties of our times, we can reinforce each other's progress. 
Perhaps, no other economy in the world offers such opportunities for the future as India's. And, few partnerships are as filled with promise as ours. 
During President Xi's visit last September, we set for ourselves a new level of ambition for our cooperation. 
Partnership in modernizing Indian railways, two Chinese industrial parks in India, commitments of 20 billion dollars in investments into India over the next five years partnership in our Make in India Mission: This is the shape of our future. 
Tomorrow in Shanghai, we will see the agreements on first of those partnerships between our industries. 
But, to maintain this partnership over the long run, we must also improve the access of Indian industry to the Chinese market. I am encouraged by President Xi's and Premier Li's commitment to resolve this problem. 
As much as our bilateral cooperation, our international partnership will be important for each other's success. 
Our changing world has created new opportunities and challenges. 
We both face instability in our shared neighbourhood that can threaten our security and slow down our economies. 
The spreading tide of extremism and terrorism is a threat we both face; for both, its source is in the same region. 
We must also deal with the changing character of terrorism that has made it less predictable and more diffuse. 
We source a large part of our energy from the same region that faces instability and uncertain future. 
India and China conduct their international commerce on the same sea lanes. The security of sea lanes is vital for our two economies; and, our cooperation is essential to achieve it. 
Equally, we both seek to connect a fragmented Asia. There are projects we will pursue individually. There are few such as the Bangladesh, China India Myanmar Corridor that we are doing jointly. 
But, geography and history tell us that the dream of an interconnected Asia will be successful, when India and China work together. 
We are two countries that have gained a lot from an open, rule-based global trading system. Equally, we have most to lose if it breaks down. 
We both have enormous stakes in the international negotiations on climate change. Our cooperation in these forums will be crucial to shape their outcomes. 
Today, we speak of Asia's resurgence. It is the result of the rise of many powers in the region at the same time. 
It is an Asia of great promise, but also many uncertainties. 
Asia's re- emergence is leading to a multi-polar world that we both welcome. 
But, it is also an unpredictable and complex environment of shifting equations. 
We can be more certain of a peaceful and stable future for Asia if India and China cooperate closely. 
A resurgent Asia is seeking a bigger voice in global affairs. India and China seek a greater role in the world. It may be reforms in the United Nations Security Council or the new Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank. 
But, Asia's voice will be stronger and our nation's role more influential, if India and China speak in one voice - for all of us and for each other. 
Simply put, the prospects of the 21st century becoming the Asian century will depend in large measure on what India and China achieve individually and what we do together. 
The rising fortunes of 2.5 billion pairs of joined hands will be of the greatest consequence for our region and the humanity. 
This is the vision that I share with President Xi and Premier Li. 
This is the impulse that is driving our relationship. 
In recent years, we have deepened our political engagement. We have kept our borders peaceful. We have managed our differences and not allowed them to impede closer cooperation. We have enhanced our cooperation across the full spectrum of our relationship. 
Yet, if we have to realise the extraordinary potential of our partnership, we must also address the issues that lead to hesitation and doubts, even distrust, in our relationship. 
First, we must try to settle the boundary question quickly. 
We both recognise that this is history's legacy. Resolving it is our shared responsibility to the future. We must move ahead with new purpose and determination. 
The solution we choose should do more than settle the boundary question. 
It should do so in a manner that transforms our relationship and not cause new disruptions. 
We have been remarkably successful in maintaining peace and tranquility along the border. 
We must continue to do that on the principle of mutual and equal security. 
Our agreements, protocols and border mechanisms have been helpful. 
But, a shadow of uncertainty always hangs over the sensitive areas of the border region. 
It is because neither side knows where the Line of Actual Control is, in these areas. 
That is why I have proposed resuming the process of clarifying it. We can do this without prejudice to our position on the boundary question. 
We should think of creative solutions to issues that have become irritants - from visa policies to trans-border rivers. 
Sometimes, small steps can have a deep impact on how our people see each other. 
We are both increasing our engagement in our shared neighbourhood. This calls for deeper strategic communication to build mutual trust and confidence. 
We must ensure that our relationships with other countries do not become a source of concern for each other. And, wherever possible and feasible, we should work together, as we did in responding to the earthquake in Nepal. 
If the last century was the age of alliances, this is an era of inter-dependence. So, talks of alliances against one another have no foundation. 
In any case, we are both ancient civilizations, large and independent nations. Neither of us can be contained or become part of anyone's plans. 
So, our partnership in international forums should not be determined by the concerns of others, but the interests of our two countries. 
China's support for India's permanent membership of a reformed UN Security Council, and for India's membership of export control regimes like Nuclear Suppliers Group will do more than just strengthen our international cooperation. 
It will take our relationship to a new level. 
It will give Asia a stronger voice in the world. 
If we are able to deepen mutual trust and confidence, we will also be able to reinforce each other's efforts of connecting Asia with itself and rest of the world. 
Our soldiers face each other on the border, but we should also deepen our defence and security cooperation to address our many common challenges. 
Above all, as we look ahead, we must build more bridges of familiarity and comfort between our people. 
About 33% of the world's population is either Indian or Chinese. Yet, our people know very little of each other. 
We must seek inspiration from the pilgrims of the ancient times, who braved the unknown in search of knowledge, and enriched us both. 
So, we have decided to extend electronic tourist visas to Chinese nationals. We are celebrating the “Year of India” in China in 2015. We are launching the ‘Provincial and State Leaders Forum’ today. 
Later today, we will have the Yoga-Taichi event. It will represent the coming together of our two civilizations. 
We are starting the Gandhi and India Study Centre in Fudan University and a college of Yoga in Kunming. 
The second route to Kailash Mansarovar for Indian pilgrims will start in June, for which I want to thank President Xi. 
These are just some of the many steps India and China are taking to bring the world's two largest populations in closer contact. 
For this reason, I chose to speak today at a university. 
Because it is the youth that will inherit the future of our countries and the responsibility for our relationship. 
President Xi has spoken eloquently about the inter-connected dreams of China and India and the new type of relationship between major countries. 
Not only are our dreams inter-connected, our future is also deeply inter- connected. 
We are at a moment, when we have the opportunity to make our choices. 
India and China are two proud civilizations and two great nations that will fulfill their destinies. 
We each have the strength and the will to choose our own paths to success. 
But, we have the ancient wisdom to know that our journey will be smoother and our future brighter, when we will walk together, confident of one another, and in step with each other. 
Thank you very much and thanks for your invitation, thanks a lot.
#DELIMITER#
15 5 2015, China
India china forum of state/provincial leaders
Premier Li Keqiang 
President of CPAFFC Madame Li Xiaolin 
Hon’ble Chief Ministers, Governors and Mayors 
This is a historic moment in the relationship between India and China. 
Today, we are launching a new vehicle for advancing cooperation between our two countries. 
In times to come, this will become one of the most important instruments for deepening our economic partnership and contact between our people. 
As someone who has been Chief Minister for thirteen years and Prime Minister for one, this forum has a special place in my heart. 
But, it is not just my sentiments that lead me to give such importance to this new institution. 
It comes from a serious conviction, born from my experience, that states have a vital role to play in the national development. 
This is especially true for large and populous countries, with a high degree of geographical, social and economic diversity. 
It becomes even more relevant, when the constitutional and political systems are federal in structure. 
These attributes exist in both India and China, the world's two most populous nations. 
In India's Constitution, state governments have predominant role in economic and social development. 
The Central Government creates the macro-economic environment. It can set the broad social and economic agenda and directions for the nation. 
It can launch development policies and schemes. It can manage resources. 
But, in the end, the state governments have an important role in their implementation. 
But, as I saw in my own experience, state governments can take innumerable initiatives for the development of the states. 
That is the level of autonomy and responsibility that they enjoy under our Constitution. 
In the same national environment, states are performing at different levels. 
For business investors, too, whether they are Indian or foreign, their journey may begin in Delhi, but their success ultimately depends on state capitals. 
Many of the critical requirements for success – infrastructure, land, utilities, skilled human resources and many approvals –ultimately depend on the state governments. 
But, for me, the involvement of states in our national effort is not just because of their constitutional and legal responsibilities. 
It is also stems from a basic management principle. The chances of success are higher when we create a sense of participation for everyone; when we give everyone a stake in success. 
That is why I speak of Team India. That is why I believe that the foundation for India's development will not be the single pillar of the Central Government, but 30 pillars comprising the Central Government and all our States. 
It follows from the simple logic of science that this foundation will be stronger and more stable. It can support a much taller structure of development. 
That is why I speak of Cooperative Federalism, when the Centre and the States are partners. I also speak of cooperative and competitive federalism, in which states compete with each other to attract investments and jobs. 
We have moved quickly in the past year to give shape to this vision. 
When we replaced the old Planning Commission with the institution called Niti Ayog, we gave a formal place and role for state governments in an institution of this nature for the first time in India. 
We have radically increased the amount of resources that the Central Government must transfer to the state governments.
And, when we began to raise large revenues from the auction of our coal, it also filled the coffers of the states where the mines are located. 
I am asking my ministries to move conferences out of Delhi to state capitals and other cities, so that they do get the benefits that come from hosting such events. 
More than anything else, we deal with the state governments in a spirit of partnership and with sensitivity to their concerns. 
And, in doing so, we do not look at the symbol of the political party that is in power in the state. 
Which is why, when I invited state governments to participate in this event, I did considered the linkages of their states with China, but also broader political representation. 
Every nation needs strong international partnerships for its progress. The linkage has deepened in an integrated world. 
As international partnerships in trade, investments, innovation, technology, tourism, education, skills and health grow, state governments have a stake in them and responsibility for their success. 
I have found, both through outbound and inbound state delegations, that state level interactions can be often more focused and productive. 
A number of decisions can be taken quickly by the state governments. 
These interactions also make the state governments more sensitive and aware of the international dynamics and requirements. 
Therefore, I attach great significance to this forum. 
It is the first that India has with any country. 
And, it is appropriate that it has started with China. 
We are two of the world's largest economies and among its fastest growing major economies. We have enormous economic synergies. 
We also face similar challenges. We have some similar experiences. 
We have both seen differences in the pace of development in different parts of our countries. 
Our economic relations are growing rapidly. 
During President Xi's visit last year, we set for ourselves an ambitious plan to take our economic relations to a new level. 
We agreed on China setting up two industrial parks in India – in Maharashtra and Gujarat. We are pleased that both Chief Ministers are here. We have agreed on cooperation in the upgrading of India's railway sector. 
I have invited Chinese companies to invest in India's manufacturing sector. President Xi spoke of 20 billion dollars of Chinese investments over the next five years. Some of the business agreements will take shape in Shanghai tomorrow. 
I believe it will be much easier to translate our vision into reality, if provincial and state governments come into closer contacts. 
It will also serve our other interests – especially promoting greater people-to-people contacts, which is at the heart of all relationships. 
Between India and China, we already have sister-state relationships between Gujarat and Guangdong. We also have a number of sister-city relations. 
During this visit, we will see the launch of Karnataka Sichuan relations and four sister-city relationships. 
It is also consistent with this spirit that President Xi began his visit to India in Ahmedabad and I started this visit in Xian. 
These are welcome developments. We are truly taking our relationship outside our national capitals to state capitals and cities. 
So, it is a great pleasure for me to join Premier Li in launching this forum. It will have our full support. And, I wish it all success. 
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
15 5 2015, China
Joint Press statement with chinese premier
Excellency, Li Keqiang, 
Members of the Press, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let me start by expressing my deep gratitude to President Xi, Premier Li and the people of China for the exceptional welcome and hospitality. 
Iam very grateful to President Xi for his special gesture of hosting me in Xian; and, for showing me the city's extraordinary heritage. It is a treasure of the world. 
Xian is also a symbol of our ancient spiritual and cultural links. I havea personal connection with Xian through Monk XuanZang. He visited my hometown 1400 years ago. 
I am pleased to visit China in the first year of my Government.This is one of our most important strategic partnerships. 
The reason is obvious. The re-emergence of India and China and their relationship will have a profound impact on the two countries and the course of this century. 
Our relationship has been complex in recent decades. 
But, we have a historic responsibility to turn this relationship into a source of strength for each other and a force of good for the world. 
We are committed to set a new direction between the two largest Asian countries. 
I believe that my discussions with President Xi and Premier Li have advanced our relationship in that direction. 
Our conversations were candid, constructive and friendly. We covered all issues, including those that trouble smooth development of our relations. 
I stressed the need for China to reconsider its approach on some of the issues that hold us back from realizing full potential of our partnership. I suggested that China should take a strategic and long term view of our relations. I found the Chinese leadership responsive. 
On the boundary question, we agreed that we continue to explore a fair, reasonable and mutually acceptable resolution. We both reiterated our strong commitment to make all efforts to maintain peace and tranquility in the border region. 
I found sensitivity to our concerns on this issue; and, interest in further intensifying confidence building measures. I also reiterated the importance of clarification of Line of Actual Control in this regard. 
I sought tangible progress on issues relating to visa policy and trans-border rivers. I also discussed some of our regional concerns. 
We agreed that as we move ahead, we should be sensitive to each other's interests; strengthen mutual trust and confidence; continue to manage our differences with maturity;and, seek solutions to outstanding issues.. 
Our decision to enhance strategic communication and coordination on our region is especially significant. 
Bilateral cooperation was a very important part of our discussion. We have set a high level of ambition for our economic partnership. We see enormous bilateral opportunities and many similar challenges, like urbanization. 
We are pleased with the progress on the commitments from the Summit last September. 
This includes cooperation in the Railways, where we have identified specific projects, and the two Chinese industrial parks in Gujarat and Maharashtra. I am pleased that the two chief ministers are here with me. 
Both leaders were very supportive about increased Chinese participation in our Make in India mission and infrastructure sector. In Shanghai tomorrow, we will see over twenty ventures in the private sector take concrete shape. 
President Xi and Premier Li were very receptive to the specific concerns I had raised on our growing trade deficit. We look forward to early impact on the ground. We have agreed to create a high-level task force to develop a strategic road-map to expand economic relations. It will cover a broad range of areas including Infrastructure, IT, Pharma, Agriculture and Manufacturing. 
An area of high priority for us is people-to-people contacts. Indians and Chinese don't know each other well, much less understand each other. 
We have decided to take the relationship out of the narrow confines of governments in the national capitals to states, cities and our people. 
For the first time, India has launched a State and Provincial Leaders' Forum with any country. This is consistent with my firm commitment to cooperative federalism in India. 
This is the “Year of India” in China; the next one will be the “Year of China” in India. This will expand tourism between our two countries. 
We are establishing a Centre for Gandhian and Indian Studies in Shanghai, a Yoga College in Kunming and a bilateral Think-Tanks Forum. 
The Nathu La route for Indian pilgrims to visit Kailash Mansarovar will become operational in June. I want to thank China for that. 
Our decision to open a consulates in Chengdu and Chennai reflects growing mutual confidence and shared commitment to expand our relationship. 
These steps will help make our relationship more broad-based and people-centric. 
Finally, we have many common global and regional interests. For example, we have a shared interest in the outcome of the international climate change negotiations. We are both trying to strengthen regional connectivity. 
Terrorism is a shared threat. Instability in West Asia matters to both of us. Peace and progress in Afghanistan benefits us both. I am confident that our international partnership will deepen. 
Today, we have signed over 20 agreements, covering diverse areas of cooperation. This shows the depth and maturity of our relationship and the positive direction of our partnership. 
This has been a very productive and positive visit. 
I look forward to working with President Xi and Premier Li. I have welcomed President Xi's proposal to hold regular summits to realize our vision for the relationship.I have also invited Premier Li to visit India at an early date. 
I look forward to Shanghai tomorrow. Thank you. Thank you, very much.
#DELIMITER#
26 4 2015, India
Mann Ki baat
My Dear Countrymen,
Namaskar!
I was not feeling like doing Mann ki Baat today. I am feeling heavy and burdened and little distressed. There were news of hailstorm, unseasonal rains and damages to farmer’s crop when I was talking to all of you last month. Suddenly, out of nowhere strong winds blew in Bihar, causing death of so many people and inflicted lot of damages there. And the earthquake has shaken the entire world on Saturday. It seems the trend of natural disasters has continued. Be it the Nepal earthquake and in India as well the earthquake took lives across various states of India. There has been loss of property because of the earthquake. However, the loss to Nepal is frightening. 
I have seen Kutch earthquake very closely on Jan 26, 2001. I can clearly imagine how devastating these disasters are. I can imagine what Nepal and the victimized families there must be going through. But my dear brothers and sisters of Nepal, India is with you in your hour of grief. Work has begun to provide assistance to people facing crisis across several locations in India and Nepal. First and foremost work is rescue operation to save people. Some people must still be alive under the debris and should get evacuated safely from there. A team of experts which has been sent is specifically trained for this task. Sniffer dogs have been sent as they possess the ability to trace any individual staying alive under the debris. Our whole endeavour would be to save maximum number of people alive. Post rescue operation, there is a need to undertake relief work as well. Rehabilitation work will also continue for long. However, humanity has a power of its own. Nepal is a dear to 125 crore people of India. Their grief is our grief. India will make sure to wipe the tears of every Nepali, hold their hands and provide support to them. 
Thousands of our Indian brothers and sisters were left stranded in Yemen a few days ago. It was a very tough task to evacuate the Indians alive amidst horrific situation, amidst the tension of bombs and guns, amidst firing but we managed to do so. Not only this, when we safely rescued a new born girl who was just a week old, we felt how much power humanity has. It brings a sense of satisfaction to the mind by rescuing a week old girl alive amidst raining bombs, guns and shadow of death. 
Wherever I went overseas in the last few days, I received compliments for one thing and that was for saving citizens of 48 countries of the world in Yemen. Be it the citizen of the US, the UK, France, Russia, Germany, Japan, we helped the citizen of every country. And due to this, the world has experienced the old saying of India, “सेवा परमो धर्मः”, meaning the greatest service to humanity is to serve others. Our Ministry of External Affairs, our Air Force and our Navy have done this work with such courage and responsibility that it will have indelible imprint over the world in the coming days. This is what I believe in. And I am happy that all the people were evacuated safely without any damage and it should be noted that India's special quality is that our culture is quite old. 
Recently when I visited France, I went to a memorial of the First World War there. The reason for visiting the place was that it is the centenary year of the First World War, but at the same time it is the centenary year of India's valour. This is the centenary year of the sacrifices made by the Indian heroes and “सेवा परमो धर्मः”, meaning the greatest service to humanity is to serve others and how this phrase has been lived by our country; this year is a centenary year for this reason also. I am saying this because very few people would know that about 15 lakh Indian soldiers had put their life at stake during the First World War from 1914 to 1918. And the Indian soldiers did not die for India’s cause. India neither wanted to capture any country, nor did it want to take away anyone’s land. But the Indians had shown amazing strength. Very few people would know that about 74000 of our soldiers sacrificed their life in the First World War. And this is also a matter of pride that about 9200 soldiers, who lost their life, were bestowed with Gallantry Award. Not only this, there were eleven such individuals who received the highest honour of Victoria Cross. About 4700 Indians had sacrificed their life especially during the World War in March 2015 in France, which has made a memorial as a mark of respect for them. I went there to commemorate and express my gratitude to the strength displayed by our ancestors.
If we see all these incidents, then we can say to the world that our country thinks in the direction of peace, happiness and welfare of the world. The country keeps doing something in this direction and if needed put its life at stake. India finds itself in the first row among the highest contributors in the peacekeeping force of the United Nation. That is the matter of pride for us.
In the last few days, I got the opportunity to accomplish two important tasks. We are to celebrate the 125th birth anniversary of respected Babasaheb Ambedkar. There has been a controversy regarding the land where his memorial was to be built for many years. I am satisfied that the Government of India decided to allot the land for building the memorial of Babasaheb Ambedkar. Similarly, there must be an International Centre in the name of Babasaheb Ambedkar in Delhi so that the entire world knows this sage, his thoughts and his work. This was also a matter, which was pending for years. I completed and laid the foundation stone of the memorial. I pledged to complete the work in 20 months, which did not happen for 20 years. And at the same time a thought has also come into my mind and we are working on it. Even today there are many families in our country that are forced to carry dirt on their head. Is it a matter of grace for us that even today some families in our country have to carry the burden of dirt on their head? With all earnest, I said in the government forum to get us free from this blur in the year when we commemorating Babasaheb Ambedkar on his 125th birth anniversary. Now, we will not tolerate a situation where any poor will have to take load of dirt on his head in our country. For this we need the support of the society, government must also shoulder its responsibility. I need cooperation of people as we have to do this work.
Babasaheb Ambedkar used to say ‘Stay Educated’ throughout life. Even today, education has not reached many dalits, exploited, and deprived ones in the society, especially girls. We must also pledge on the occasion of 125th birth anniversary of Babasaheb Ambedkar. There must not be any son or daughter of the poor remaining illiterate in our villages, cities and locality. Government must do its duty. And if it gets the support of the society, then we will definitely feel a sense of satisfaction. I want to share a matter of happiness and share another matter of discomfort as well. I take pride of the fact that two daughters of India have made the country proud. One daughter -Saina Nehwal became the world’s no. 1 in Badminton, and the second daughter Sania Mirza became the world’s top player in Tennis Doubles tournament. Congratulations to both and all the daughters of our country. I feel proud seeing the effort and strength of our own. But sometimes, we lose cool. When the Cricket World Cup was on and we lost to Australia in the semi-finals, the kind of words used and the treatment meted out to the players was not good my countrymen. How can be a game with no defeat? Victory and defeat are part and parcel of life. If the players of our country have been beaten in a match, then we must encourage them in the times of crisis. There must be an effort to create an environment to generate new confidence. I am sure that we will learn from the defeats going forward and we will not lose control in few moments by indulging in action-reaction. And I am getting worried. Whenever I see that anything happens all of a sudden, a mob surrounds and burns the truck, burns the vehicle. And we see these things on TV as well. Accident must not happen. Even the government must make full effort. But my dear countrymen tell me if we should burn the vehicles? Dead ones do not come back. Can’t we ensure law to take its due course keeping our emotion in check? 
Well, today my mind has been very grief-stricken due to these incidents, especially due to natural disasters. But amidst this also, we will move forward with courage and confidence. Be it individual of this country - dalit, oppressed, exploited, tribe, villager, poor, farmer, small businessman, we will move forward on the path of welfare for everyone. Examinations of students are over. Especially, the students of 10th and 12th standard must have made a program of celebrating the holidays. I wish all of you a very good vacation; get the opportunity to learn something new. And since you have worked hard the whole year, then I wish that you spend some time with your family with joy and happiness.
Namaskar to everyone.
Thank You!
#DELIMITER#
15 4 2015, Canada
Joint Press statement with prime minister of canada
Prime Minister Harper and Members of Media,
I am delighted to visit this beautiful country and this charming city.
I attach the highest importance to India's relations with Canada.
This has been reinforced by my excellent experience with Canada as Chief Minister of Gujarat.
55 PM Modi with Canada PM Stephen Harper at Exchange of Agreements and Press Statements (8)
Our relationship had drifted in the past. In recent years, Prime Minister Harper's vision and leadership changed the course of our relations.
I am conscious of the significance of this visit in the history of our relations.
I have come at a time when the importance of this relationship for our two countries has never been stronger.
We are two major democracies with deeply shared values.
Few countries in the world can match Canada's potential to be a partner in India's economic transformation. And, it exists in a new environment in India, which is open, predictable, stable and easy to do business in.
Equally, the vast scale of India's transformation, and our rapid economic growth, offers immense opportunities for Canada.
I seek Canada's cooperation and investment in every area of India's national development priority,- Energy and Infrastructure, Manufacturing and Skills, Smart Cities and agro-industry, and Research and Education.
Prime Minister Harper and I are absolutely committed to establish a new framework for economic partnership. I am pleased that we have made rapid progress on long pending agreements.
55 PM Modi with Canada PM Stephen Harper at Exchange of Agreements and Press Statements (4)
I am confident that we can conclude the Bilateral Investment Promotion and Protection Agreement very soon. We will also implement the road map to conclude the Comprehensive Economic Co-operation Agreement by September 2015.
The thirteen agreements on skill development reflect my commitment to empower the youth of India with world class skills for India and the global economy.
The agreement on procurement of uranium from Canada for our civilian nuclear power plants launches a new era of bilateral nuclear cooperation.
It also reflects a new level of mutual trust and confidence. Further, it will contribute to India's efforts to power its growth with clean energy.
As the agreement today on Space highlights, we have strong synergy for cooperation in areas of advanced technologies.
To support greater engagement and people-to-people contacts, we have liberalised our visa policy for Canada. We will issue Electronic Visa Authorisation for tourist visa for Canadian nationals. They will also be eligible for ten-year visas now.
Prime Minister and I agree that a strong bilateral relationship will provide a solid foundation to pursue our common international interests.
We also agree that in the troubled world of today, our cooperation will help advance our shared values and peace in the world.
We in India felt Canada's pain when this city was struck by a senseless act of terrorism.
The threat of terrorism is growing; its shadow extends over cities and lives across the world.
55 PM Modi with Canada PM Stephen Harper at Exchange of Agreements and Press Statements (9)
We will deepen our cooperation to combat terrorism and extremism. We will also promote a comprehensive global strategy, and consistent policy and action against all sources of terrorism and its support.
We also agree on the need to enhance our defence and security cooperation. I welcome our recent agreement on cyber security.
We both recognise that peace and stability in West Asia will make us safer at home; so will Afghanistan's successful transition.
I believe that Canada is a major Asia Pacific power and should play a more active role, including in regional institutions, in promoting a stable and prosperous future for the region.
I look forward to our continued partnership in G 20.
In conclusion, let me say that ours is a natural partnership of shared values.
It is an economic partnership of immense mutual benefit.
It is a strategic partnership that can help address many of our shared global challenges.
55 PM Modi with Canada PM Stephen Harper at Exchange of Agreements and Press Statements (12)
And, it is a relationship nurtured by the emotional bonds of a vibrant Indian community of 1.2 million.
I am confident that this visit will be a springboard for a new strategic partnership between our two democracies.
Finally, Prime Minister has been most gracious and generous in choosing to go with me to Ottawa and Vancouver. I also thank him for returning to us a precious piece of our heritage.
There is no better evidence of his commitment to our relationship. There will be no better way for me to experience this country's huge diversity.
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
14 4 2015, Germany
Joint Press with German Chancellor
Chancellor Merkel, Members of the Media
I want to sincerely thank Chancellor Merkel and Germany for the very warm welcome that my delegation and I have received.
I am especially grateful that in the first year of my Government, India was chosen as a partner country for the largest industrial trade fair in the world.
Chancellor Merkel was generous with her time for me, my delegation and the CEOs of several Indian companies in Hannover. Today, my delegation and I have once again been heartily welcomed in Berlin.
I also thank her for the very open, constructive and perceptive discussions on relations between India and Germany. This is a reflection of her deep concern for Germany’s interests and her commitment to India – Germany relations.
Yesterday in Hannover, she accepted the invitation of India’s Lion to raise the level of Germany’s engagement in India and assured me of a strong response by Germany’s Eagle. I believe that there will be a strong partnership between the King of the Earth, Lion and the King of the Skies, the Eagle.
When I last came to Berlin, Germany was successful in winning the World Cup Final. This time in Berlin, I feel that we will also be successful in taking the strategic partnership between India and Germany to new heights.
Whenever anyone in India talks about technology, manufacturing or high quality, Germany is the first country that comes to the mind. So, it is natural that when India has embarked on a new journey for ‘Make in India’ for economic development and employment, we look forward to Germany’s strong partnership.
Whatever objectives we think of in terms of economic transformation and improvement in quality of life of ordinary citizens, technology, skills, innovation and investment will play an important role in it.
My objective of coming to Germany was not only to invite the German industry to India, but to assure them that they would find an open and stable environment, which would be easy to do business in; and that they will have my full support to invest and work in India.
I feel deeply encouraged by the enthusiasm and interest that I have seen in Chancellor Merkel and Germany. Equally, the feedback that I have got will be of great benefit to me in framing our policies.
I have also decided that we will establish a mechanism for German companies to facilitate their investment and business in India.
Our goal of ‘Make in India’ and creating employment for our youth depends on skill development in our country. Germany is a world leader in this field. India will have to pursue its skill development programme in accordance with its own circumstances. But at the same time, there is a lot that we can learn from Germany. We had a detailed discussion on the subject. Similarly, we intend to further strengthen our close cooperation in the areas of science, technology and education.
An area that has great priority for me personally and for my country is renewable energy and energy efficiency. As I have already said, we intend to add 175 Giga Watts of renewable energy during the next seven years. Germany is a strong partner in the development of clean energy. We would also like your cooperation on manufacturing of equipment for clean and renewable energy in India; and enhance our shared efforts to address the challenge of climate change.
Development of India as a manufacturing hub and expansion of infrastructure of India would also be beneficial for trade. Our imports would also grow. And, it is natural that German companies would benefit a lot from it. In this context, I would also like to state that negotiations between India and European Union on a Broad-based Trade and Investment Agreement have remained stalled for two years. I have requested Chancellor Merkel that India and European Union should resume the negotiations quickly and conclude a balanced and mutually beneficial agreement at the earliest.
We would also like to enhance our cooperation in the area of advanced technology and defence manufacturing. I hope that the German companies would participate enthusiastically in this and that your government would support them fully.
Chancellor Merkel and I had also discussed international developments. We in India believe that economic momentum in Europe is important for the global economy and European stability for global peace. The world looks to Germany for leadership in addressing both challenges. I also congratulate her on the successful outcome of talks with Iran. This will be beneficial for the entire region. Instability and violence in West Asia affects the security of our citizens at home. Peaceful and democratic development of Afghanistan is important for both of us. The direction that Asia-Pacific region will take in this century will be of great significance to the entire world.
The spread of terrorism is growing and its character is changing. The threat is coming close to us across every region of the world. We need a comprehensive global strategy to deal with this global challenge, in which India and Germany can work together. Equally, in the coming days, maritime cyber and space security would be a matter of concern to everyone and we should increase our cooperation in this area as well.
It is my belief that India and Germany are two countries that have earned the right to be permanent members of the United Nations Security Council. Our membership will also be beneficial to the world. We both would like to see tangible progress in the United Nations Security Council reforms during the 70th Anniversary year of the United Nations.
We also look forward to a successful outcome of COP-21 in Paris this year.
Once again, I would like to thank everyone, especially Chancellor Merkel for a very successful and productive visit and I look forward eagerly to hosting Chancellor Merkel in India in October.
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
13 4 2015, Germany
Indo-German business summit, Hannover
Friends,
I am really happy to be here in the Hannover fair. It is an added pleasure to talk to you that too in the presence of Chancellor Merkel. Myself and Chancellor Merkel had a very good interaction over dinner last night. You also must have met a number of Indian companies and CEOs. I believe that the participation in Hannover fair would be very useful for both sides. I request you to visit the India pavillion and the stalls of our State Government and private companies.
You will be able to see for yourself the winds of change in India. We are very keen to develop the sectors where you are strong. We need your involvement. The scope and potential, the breadth and length of infrastructure and related developments is very huge in India. Just to give you some examples:
• We have planned to build 50 million houses by 2022. In addition, we are going to develop smart cities and mega industrial corridors.
• For this purpose, we have refined our FDI Policy in construction. We have also come up with a regulatory framework for this sector.
• We have targeted 175 Giga Watt of renewable energy in next few years. In addition to generation, the issues of transmission and distribution of electricity are equally important for us;
• We are modernizing our Railway systems including signals, and railway stations. We are planning metro rail in fifty cities and high speed trains in various corridors.
• Similar is the case with Highways.
• We are putting up new ports and modernizing the old ones through an ambitious plan called Sagarmala;
• Similar focus is on upgrading the existing Airports and putting up regional airports to enhance connectivity to places of economic and tourist importance.
• In financial services too, we are moving towards a more inclusive and faster delivery of financial products including bank loans and insurance.
• For this purpose, we opened 140 million bank accounts; increased FDI in insurance upto 49% and have set up MUDRA Bank.
• We also announced innovative schemes for insurance and pension to enhance social security for our citizens.
We also want to promote manufacturing in a big way particularly to create jobs for our youth. For this purpose, we have launched a campaign called “Make in India”.
All this is a historic opportunity for the German companies. You would already be knowing the direction of my Government and the steps we are taking. We have committed ourselves for creating and improving the business environment. I can assure you that once you decide to be in India, we are confident to make you comfortable.
Germany ranks 8th among foreign investor countries in India. About 600 Indo-German Joint ventures are presently operating in India. The purpose of my being here and participating in the Hannover Fair is to highlight that there is more potential in Indo-German economic collaboration. Though we have a vibrant relationship, our economic partnership is not as much as both countries would like to have. The flow of investments from Germany is well below the potential and less than Indian investments in Germany.
Many more German companies have the possibility of investing in India to take advantage of India’s potentials. The potential lies in Manufacturing as well as infrastructure and in skill development for that purpose. I know that the reason for this situation may not be from German side. It is from the Indian side also.
I am here to assure the German companies that India is now a changed country. Our regulatory regime is much more transparent, responsive and stable. We are taking a long-term and futuristic view on the issues.
Lot of efforts have been made and are still underway to improve the ‘Ease of Doing Business’ in the country.
• Reducing the complicated procedures, making them available at one platform, preferably online, simplifying the forms and formats has been taken up on war footing.
• Definite mechanisms for hand holding have been set up in the form of hub and spoke. Invest India is the nodal agency for this purpose.
We do believe that FDI is important and it will not come in the country without a globally competitive business environment. Therefore, in this year's budget we have rationalized a number of issues which were bothering you. In particular,
• We have removed lot of regressive taxation regimes. In our very first Budget, we said we will not resort to retrospective taxation. And if such issues do arise, they will have to be reviewed at the highest level. We have taken bold steps of not dragging the litigation in a few cases where we felt that the steps of the previous government were not on right lines.
• In this budget, we allowed Tax pass through for AIFs, rationalization of capital gains of REITs, modification in PE norms and deferring the implementation of GAAR for two years. We are constantly working to improve the business environment further.
• We are trying to introduce an element of transparency and predictability in taxation system.
• We have fast tracked approvals in industry and infrastructure. This includes environmental clearances, extending the industrial licences, delicencing of defence items, and simplification of cross-border trade.
• Within a very short time, we introduced GST Bill in Parliament.
Such measures have helped in building up an enhanced investor confidence. The sentiments for private investment and inflow of foreign investments are positive. FDI inflows have gone up by 36% during April-2014 and January-2015 against the same period in previous year;
Our growth rate is about 7%-plus. Most of the international financial institutions including the World Bank, IMF, UNCTAD, OECD and others are predicting even faster growth and even better in the coming years. MOODY’s have recently upgraded the rating of India as “positive” on account of our concrete steps in various economic segments.
Indo-German Business Summit in Hannover (5)
It is the effort of my Government to encourage innovation, R&D and entrepreneurship in the country. In this year’s budget, we have set up some innovative institutional mechanisms for that purpose.
Similarly, for infrastructure development, we have taken some far reaching steps.
• First of all we have made an all-time high allocation for Roads and railways sectors.
• In addition, we are setting up India Infrastructure Investment Fund.
• We have also allowed Tax free Bonds in the Infrastructure sector including roads and railways.
I wish all success to the Hannover Messe. I also wish all participants good luck and progress. I also take this opportunity for inviting more and more German companies to India. I assure them all support from my side.
Friends! Indo-German partnership should and will flourish. I expect very good outcome from this coming together. Let us work together in mutual interest and for welfare of the people of the two great countries.
At the end, it is my advice to you to come and feel the change in India’s regulatory environment. Please do not go by old perceptions.
The symbol of lion for make in India has been chosen very carefully. We know that our biggest need today is to create jobs for our 65% population which is young. Hence, Make in India is the need. Hence, the lion because a lion cannot be stopped. We are confident that our journey to make India a global manufacturing hub cannot be stopped that too by our own rules and regulations. We must and we will make corrections wherever it is required.
Once again I invite you to India. I assure you of my personal attention in your success while you are in India.
Thank You very much.
#DELIMITER#
12 4 2015, Germany
Inauguration of Hannover Messe
Her Excellency, Chancellor Dr. Angela Merkel, Vice Chancellor, Mr. Sigmar Gabriel Minister Dr. Johanna Wanka, Minister-President Mr. Stephan Weil Chairman of Deutsche Messe Dr. Wolfram von Fritsch
It is truly a great privilege for me to be here at the Inauguration of the world's largest industrial fair.
inner HMinner HM2
First, I want to thank the city of Hannover and Hannover Messe. They have been most generous in allowing us to unleash our lions in this city. The lions are a symbol of a new India. They roar; but with a message of friendship and promise of partnership, from .25 billion people of India. This is also the message of 15 states, 20 CEOs and 350 companies from India participating in this Fair. 
Your choice of India as a Partner Country reflects the new confidence in India. Our decision to be here in the first year of my Government reflects our priority: 
We want to accelerate economic growth and create jobs for our youth. 
We want to build world class industry and infrastructure. 
We want to transform our cities and villages; clean up our environment; and improve the quality of life. 
Our presence as a partner country says something else also. We will naturally pursue our goals on the strength of our own resources, skills and enterprise. But, we know that we will be more successful when we do this in partnership with the world. For people in India, Germany is a valued partner; and, an enduring symbol of technology and innovation, quality and productivity. 
Even more, India and Germany share a close and warm relationship. It goes back centuries, in the intellectual journey of German scholars. It has grown in depth and diversity from our birth as modern Republics at the same time, Through the passage of history, Indians and Germans have formed a relationship of mutual fascination and goodwill. 
It also includes a vibrant economic partnership that extends beyond the last century. Today, you can easily think of companies like Siemens as Indian! Nearly a hundred years ago, India's great poet and philosopher, Rabindranath Tagore said, that Germany has done more than any other country to open India to the Western World. 
Today, I come to seek German partnership in my own mission to open up India's seamless economic potential.To the industry of the world that has assembled here today, I say that we have no special bias for our host today! India is open and ready to embrace the world. As I have travelled around the world, I have seen a new level of interest in building partnerships of trade, investment and innovation in India. It mirrors the surge of hope in our own people and industry; the new tide of expectation in our 800 million youth – for opportunities and progress. And, if we want to fulfill the dreams of our youth, we must turn our industry into a manufacturing hub for the world and an engine for employment at home. And, we must equip our youth with the skills to meet the needs of our nation, and the demands of the globalised world. 
Whatever we choose to do, from reaching the cutting edge of industry to meeting the most critical social need, we require investment and technology, industry and enterprise. That is why for me, Make in India is not a brand. Nor is it simply a slogan on a smart lion! 
It is a new national movement. And, it covers the whole spectrum of our government, society and business. To this informed audience, I hardly need to state the obvious: Our scale of transformation is vast; therefore, the opportunities we offer are huge. 
You are also familiar with our demography and our demand. The question that you ask is whether we can turn this potential into a reality; and, our vision into action. 
What you seek is not just an attractive destination; but, also the assurance that it is open; and, it is easy to reach and work in. You want the confidence that the environment is stable; the rules won't change frequently; and there would be no surprises. So, we have moved with speed, resolve and boldness to fulfill our pledge. 
We are creating a stable economic environment that inspires confidence at home and abroad. We are pursuing strong fiscal discipline to do that. I know how much Chancellor Merkel will appreciate that point! 
We have taken sweeping steps to reform our policies and open up more to foreign direct investments in key areas like insurance, construction, defence and railways. Railways is the thread that binds India. It will now be a fast track to India's transformation. And, what was a department of the government is now open to 100% Foreign Direct Investments. 
We are removing unnecessary regulations and simplifying our procedures. We are using digital technology to eliminate multiple approvals and endless wait. We will guide you and walk with you in your projects. We have set up Invest India and country desks in it that will be networked to the states. We will nurture innovation and protect your intellectual property. There were institutions in India that seemed beyond scrutiny. Well, they no longer are. We are reforming institutions in ways that has not happened in decades. We are building a tax regime that is predictable, stable and competitive. We will now address the remaining uncertainties. The Goods and Services Tax is a long needed revolution that is becoming a reality. 
For us, the highest priority is creating world class infrastructure. We have made a sharp increase in public investments. We have established a National Infrastructure and Investment Fund and a new institution for integrated development of this sector. We are launching attractive new financial instruments for long term funds. We seek to fuel our growth with the cleanest and most efficient use of energy. 
We have set a target of 75 Giga Watts of new capacity for renewable and clean energy in the next seven years. It is a challenging goal- yes; but, important to pursue. Good Governance is essential not just for our citizens, but also for business. With transparency and speed, we have resumed long stalled projectsand allocation of resources. This is adding new momentum to our economy. We are instituting a rational framework for acquisition of land without causing distress to farmers and other landowners. We are creating a predictable and transparent environment approval process that will protect our natural heritage. Above all, we know, as you do, that the investment journey may begin in Delhi, but its success depends on state capitals and districts. 
So, for the first time, we are working as Team India – a new partnership between the Centre and the States. We speak of cooperative federalism, but also of competitive federalism, where states would excel by competing with each other for investments and jobs. We are also giving them more resources, so that they can build the infrastructure that you need. I also see them as partners in our international engagement. 
But, I am also aware that it is easier to change policies and write new laws than it is to change attitudes, culture and systems. Every CEO who has tried a turnaround knows that. Our task is huge; it won't be completed overnight. But, I am confident that it will. And, we are moving firmly and clearly in that direction. The wind of change is there. and, it is gathering speed. When IMF, the World Bank, credit rating agencies and expert speak in one voice of optimism about India, we know that the wind is blowing in the right direction. And, it has made us the fastest growing economy in the world. 
So, my message to you is this: You will find environment that is not only open, but also welcoming. We will make it easy to do business in India. And, we will always be eager to listen to your feedback. So, our industry is here to showcase their skills. There are many Indian examples of technological leadership in the world. But, we want a future in which excellence defines every sector and every industry in our country. And, they are here to seek your partnership. 
It is not just about financial flows, new technology or products. It is also about learning from each other; about seeing possibilities in new ways. India is a nation that is blessed with so much goodwill in the world. Everywhere, I see a strong desire for India to succeed. 
The progress of one sixth of humanity will be of great consequence for the world and our beautiful planet. It will be a world of more hope and opportunities; a world more confident of its success. This is a time of political instability and economic challenges; and, threats of violence that are increasingly close to our homes. The humanity needs the solidarity and strength of international partnerships more than ever before. 
India will do its part - as an anchor of economic stability; an engine for growth; and, as a force of peace and stability in the world. So, let me invite you to do business and make in India – for India and the world. Let me invite you to be our partner in making a new India. I also welcome you to enjoy our timeless traditions, the ceaseless celebration of diversity;and, the warm embrace of friendship. 
I wish the Fair all success. When its shutters come down, I hope that many new doors would have opened. 
Thank you once again. 
#DELIMITER#
10 4 2015, France
Address to unesco
Director General, Madam Bukova
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,
I am truly honoured to address UNESCO.
I feel specially privileged to visit this great institution in its 70th anniversary year.
This milestone reminds us of a fundamental achievement of our age: for the first time in human history, we have an organization for the entire world – the United Nations.
And, through the sweeping change of these decades, through many challenges of our times, and the great progress of this era, the organization has endured and grown.
There have been doubts and skepticism. There is need for urgent reforms.
But, for the nations that came together at its birth; and, for three times as many that joined it later, there is one unshakeable belief:
“Our world is and will remain a better place because of the United Nations.”
It is this faith that has given birth to so many of its institutions that deal with every aspect of human challenges.
Our collective goal is to seek a peaceful and prosperous future for our world, in which every nation has a voice;
all peoples have an identity;
all cultures are flowers in a garden;
every human being has a life of dignity;
every child a future of opportunity;
and our planet the chance to preserve its glory.
No organization serves our cause more than this one.
The seeds of our collective destiny are sown in human minds.
It is nurtured by the light of education and the spirit of enquiry.
It makes progress through the marvels of science.
And, it draws strength from the basic character of Nature – the harmony and unity in diversity.
That is why UNESCO was among the first missions of the United Nations.
That is why India values the work of UNESCO so deeply; and, cherishes our partnership so immensely.
I am conscious of the extraordinary legacy of our relationship from the time of UNESCO's birth.
I recall Mahatma Gandhi's message to UNESCO, calling for urgent action to address the needs of education to secure lasting peace;
And, the leadership of Dr. Radhakrishnan, later our first President, in the early years of this institution.
We are grateful for UNESCO's support for education and science, in India and for preservation of our cultural heritage.
Equally, we are privileged to have worked with UNESCO in support of its mission around the world.
For, in the challenges India faces and the dreams that Indians seek, our approach mirrors the ideals of UNESCO.
We have built a modern state in an ancient land, with a timeless tradition of openness and co-existence; and, a society of extraordinary diversity.
The foundation of our Constitution rests on a fundamental principle: the peace and prosperity of all is indivisible from the welfare of the individual;
the strength of the nation is determined by the joined hands of every citizen;
and, real progress is measured through empowerment of the weakest.
This has been our creed since we assumed office nearly a year ago.
And, we shall judge our progress not just by the cold statistics of growth, but by the warm glow of belief and hope on human faces.
For me, it means many things.
We will defend and protect the rights and liberty of every citizen.
We will ensure that every citizen , of every faith, culture and creed has an equal place in our society; belief in her future; and the confidence to pursue it.
Education always had a special place in our tradition.
As our ancient saying goes, it is
व्यये कृते वर्धते एव नित्यं, विद्या धनं सर्व प्रधानं
The wealth that increases by giving, That wealth is knowledge and is supreme of all possessions
We have launched the most ambitious programme to provide skills to our youth; and education for every child in the remotest villages.
Our progress will remain a mirage unless women no longer suffer from daily fear, or barriers to opportunity; and, when they are no longer victims of exclusion and prejudice. And, this change must begin with the girl child.
So, the programme to educate and support the girl child in India is one that is closest to my heart. We will ensure that they can go to school; and, also, that they can attend it in safety and dignity.
Today, the digital age has created opportunities beyond imagination; but, digital divide can expand disparities.
On the other hand, digital connectivity and smart phones have create a revolution of possibilities to educate, deliver services and extend development.
This is the most exciting change in our era.
Our Digital India will create a participative, transparent and a responsive government, connected to the citizens. And, we have launched a digital literacy mission to connect each of our 600,000 villages.
The link between habitat and fulfillment of human potential is deep and strong.
So, the highest priority for my Government is to provide a roof over every head; power in every house; sanitation and clean water within everyone's reach; a hope for every child to survive; and a chance for every new mother to love her child.
It also means clean rivers, air that we can breathe and forests filled with the sound of birds.
To achieve these goals, we need not just policies and resources, but even more the power of science.
For us, science is driven by the larger purpose of human development; and, for a safe, sustainable, prosperous future for India.
Science also unites people across borders in a shared purpose.
And, when we share its fruits with those who don't have it, we connect lives and make our world a better place.
India never forgets the help we have received in our early years; today, we are fulfilling our responsibility to others.
Therefore, science is a key priority of India's international engagement.
Culture is a sublime expression of a people; and, the foundations of a society.
UNESCO's initiatives to preserve the world's cultural heritage, including in India, are inspiring.
We see India's rich and diverse cultural heritage as humanity's wealth.
And, we will do everything to preserve it for future generations.
We have launched ‘Heritage Development and Augmentation Yojana – HRIDAY or heart in Hindi – to preserve the cultural heritage of our cities.
We have started a special scheme called “PRASAD” – or offerings) – Pilgrimage Rejuvenation and Spirituality Augmentation Drive” for rejuvenation of our pilgrim centres”.
Madam Chairman,
I speak of our vision and initiatives, because in our own aspirations and efforts, we see the value of UNESCO to our world with great clarity.
In the challenges of our times, we see its purpose with a sense of urgency.
The fault lines in our world are shifting from the boundaries of nations into the web of our societies and the streets of our cities.
The threats are changing from domination by states to destruction by groups.
We fight today not only over what we claim, but also for who we are.
And, in many parts of the world, culture remains a source of conflict.
We have access to communication at the click of a mouse.
We live in a world of information.
Yet, we know that familiarity does not always lead to fraternity; or reduce prejudice.
When Ebola threatens an entire region; the fury of unseasonal storms destroys crops and lives; and, diseases still defeat our most courageous fight, we understand how fragile we are.
When we see people living at the edge of existence; children shut out of classrooms; and, nations without the human resources to shoulder the responsibility of progress, we know that we still have a long way to go.
To be sure, our world has made incredible progress over seven decades. So, our progress should inspire us to meet our challenges.
UNESCO can play a vital role in addressing them.
Culture must connect, not divide, our world.
It should be a bridge to greater respect and understanding between people.
It should join nations in peace and harmony. Across India's neighbourhood, Asia and Indian Ocean, we are retracing our cultural connections to form a closer bond of friendship in this dynamic region.
We must turn deep into our cultures; traditions; and religions; to overcome the rising tide of extremism, violence, and divisions across the world.
We must intensify exchanges between the youth of the world to sow the seeds of a more peaceful world.
Cultures also hold great wealth of traditional knowledge. Societies across the world have evolved them through wisdom gathered over the ages.
And, they hold the secrets to economic, efficient, and, environment friendly solutions to many of our problems.
But, today they are at risk of extinction in our globalised world.
So, we must here make more efforts to revive, preserve and nurture traditional knowledge.
This will also redefine a fundamental truth about human civilization: as our cultures are diverse, knowledge has many sources.
In doing so, we will give ourselves a greater chance to meet our challenges.
We must do more to harness science for human welfare in some of the most vulnerable parts of the world – especially for health and food security.
Climate change is a pressing global challenge. And, it calls for a collective human action; and, a comprehensive response.
We must draw upon our entire wealth of wisdom; the strength of every institution; all possibilities of innovation; and, the power of science.
In India, faith and Nature have had a deep link since ancient times.
For us, the only path to prosperity is the sustainable one.
We make this choice with the natural instincts of our culture and tradition. But, we also do this with a commitment to our future.
We have, for example, set a target of adding 175,000 MW of clean and renewable energy in the next seven years.
Too often, our discussion is reduced to an argument about emission cuts. But, we are more likely to succeed if we offer affordable solutions, not simply impose choices.
That is why I have called for global public action to develop clean energy, that is affordable and accessible to all.
And, it is for the same reason that I call for a change in lifestyle. Because, the emission reduction that we seek will be the natural outcome of how we live.
And, it will also mean a different path to economic well being.
It is with this vision that I had called the United Nations General Assembly last September to declare June 21st as the International Day of Yoga.
Yoga awakens a sense of oneness and harmony with self, society and Nature. By changing our lifestyle and creating consciousness, it can help us deal with climate change and create a more balanced world.
Last December, the UNGA adopted it with a record co-sponsorship in a record time.
It was not just an act of friendship for India. It reflected our collective ability to go beyond our familiar boundaries in search for solutions to common challenges.
The campaign to clean our Ganges River is a mission that connects culture, science, traditional knowledge, education, economy, and, environment; but, it is also about attitudes and lifestyles.
Madam Chairperson,
Outside this hall, I paid respect at the statue of a great Indian philosopher and sage, Shri Aurobindo.
There is much that we can learn from his humanism and spiritualism, from his belief in the unity of individual consciousness with the world outside; the enlightened purpose of education; the service of science; and, the unity of world, founded on national freedom, diversity of civilizations and autonomy of culture.
It is a guiding spirit for the purpose of this institution – the defence of peace in the mind of men.
The 70th anniversary is a moment to celebrate our remarkable journey so far. It is also a time to look ahead with wisdom that has come with time and experience.
Whatever we wish to achieve as United Nations, UNESCO will always have a part to play – whether it is sustainable development, our post-2015 agenda, climate change or peace and security.
UNESCO's responsibilities to our future have become bigger; and, so our resolve must be stronger.
Thank you very much for this opportunity.
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
22 3 2015, India
Mann Ki baat to farmers
Greetings to all my dear Farmer brothers and sisters!
Today, I feel so fortunate to avail this opportunity to speak with my farmer brothers and sisters from different corners of the country. When I speak to farmers, I speak to the village and its residents, and also to the farm labourers. I am also speaking to the mothers and sisters who work on the farm fields. And in this context probably this feeling is a little different from all the interactions I had through Mann ki Baat.
When I decided to speak about farmers in Mann Ki Baat, I never expected that the farmers from far off villages across the country would be willing to ask numerous questions and would provide such information. I was taken aback to receive your numerous letters and questions in such huge numbers. I can say that you all are very aware and active and you all probably yearn that somebody listens to you. First of all I would like to express my heartfelt greetings to you all. I have read your letters and understood the agony and struggle in your lives. Despite bearing so much misery, I cannot imagine what all you have gone through in your lives.
You all have taken me aback but I take this Mann ki Baat to be an opportunity for education and experience. My dear farmer brothers and sisters, I would like to assure you, that all your questions and queries from different aspects that you brought to my notice would be addressed by me and I will bring consciousness and sensitivity on those subjects in my government and not let my village, my poor people, my farmer brothers will not be forced to live in this pathetic condition. I am shocked, farmers have written letters related to farming but they have also brought some other issues, like the problems they face with the village mafias and gangs. I can understand the problems related to natural calamities, but they are also facing the issues with small time businessmen.
Some farmers have to drink contaminated water in their villages, some have raised concerns on the facilities to provide shelter to their cattle, and some have also mentioned that there is no facility to dispose off the dead animals, which leads to various diseases among the villagers. This suggests that today through Mann Ki Baat, the governing bodies are getting a unique chance to understand numerous problems of the farmers. We can attain our rights to govern the country only when we can understand and provide solution to all these small but important issues. I feel so embarrassed when I read your letters and think what we have done so far. I have no answer to this question. What have we done? Yes, you words have touched my heart. I will try my best to bring a change and would awaken the sleeping government to run in the most appropriate manner. This will be my primary focus and that is a promise from my side.
I am aware that you had to face great difficulties last year due to scarcity of rain. This year, due to the unseasonal rain and hail-storm, all the states above Maharashtra had to bear a lot of difficulties. Farmers, across all the corners of the country had to face great difficulties. A poor farmer who leads his life through slogging in the fields has no other source of living or income. I am with you in this difficult time of your life. Our government is also taking stock of the situation minutely, on various issues of the farmer and is in touch with different departments of the state. The ministers are also out in the field visiting various states and collecting reviews and analysing its situation. I have also asked the state governments to work closely along with the central government and strive to help as much as possible to our farmer brothers and sisters in this situation. I can assure you that the government will take proper steps and solve your problems promptly and help you in this difficult time. We will do whatever is possible to help you and do our best to fulfil those.
Villagers and farmers have raised various issues. Irrigation problem is one of the most important issues. Farmers are also angry due to the unavailability of roads in villages. They are also unhappy about the increasing price of fertilizers. There is no electricity. They are also unhappy about the fact that they are unable to educate their children, which in their wish is also a complaint. Mothers and sisters are angry with the drug abuse prevailing in the villages. Some women have also addressed the issues of tobacco intake by their husbands. I can understand your pain. Some farmers believe that they can only hear the strategies adopted by the government, but it never reaches the villagers. Farmers have mentioned that they slog day and night to provide food to the entire nation, but they never receive the full amount of money in return. When they go out to sell the crops and other farm products, there is no one to buy from us. So, they are left with no other option, than to sell the products at lower prices. They are doomed in both the case, if they produce more or less. This means farmers have brought to my notice their inner thoughts through their letters. I can assure all my farmer brothers and sisters that the state and central government will take proper steps actively from now on. I will inspire the government to speed up the actions and provide solutions to all your problems. I can understand that you are losing patience. This is quite natural as you have waited for sixty long years. I will try to find a full-proof solution to this.
My farmer brothers, I have found one primary problem among your various questions that is the ‘Acquisition of Land Bill’, prevailing in almost all the states. I am shocked to hear these rumours spread across the country. It is good that you have raised such small issues and questions. I will try to bring the truth before you. You must be aware that the Acquisition of Land bill was passed 120 years ago. Post-independence, this law was practised till 60-65 years. Today, the activists, who call themselves as the supporters of farmers, also practised this law in the country, governed the country and the farmers got their share. Everybody believed that there should be a change in this law and I too believed in the change. We were in the opposition and we too believed in the change of law.
In the year 2013, a new law was passed in haste. We too supported this law giving our full support to the government. If a law benefits the farmers, who would not like to support it, so we too supported the law. But after the initiation of the law, some of the concerns got raised in our minds. We felt that this way we would be betraying the hopes of farmers. We do not have any rights to betray the farmers. On one side, when our government was formed, we saw that all the states raised their voice to amend the law, to improve the law; the law must be modified to plug the loop holes. On the other side, we found that no state is ready to implement the law, only Maharashtra and Haryana governments under Congress rule had implemented the law who proclaim to be well-wishers of farmers, they brought an ordinance and decided to provide just half of the decided amount as compensation. What kind of justice is this to the farmers? After reviewing all these points, we felt that there should be some re-thinking. When things are done in haste then some drawbacks remain. The motive might be good but if there are drawbacks, then they should be rectified.
Now, I will speak of most primary drawback, which you all will find quite astonishing. All the people, who are self-proclaimed well-wishers of farmers are not ready to give any answers to these questions. Are you all aware that there are 13 different laws in our country through which most of our country’s land, like Railway, National Highway and minefields is acquired. Are you aware that in the law of previous government, these 13 areas have been excluded from the law? With this exclusion, I mean that the farmers would receive the same compensation as they used to get under the previous law. You tell me, is this not a drawback? This was a mistake or not? This was a mistake or not? We have modified this law and the farmers would receive four times the compensation, even if these 13 areas be used for railways or highways. We have tried to improve the law. Who would say that this amendment is against the farmers? This is why; we had brought an ordinance. If we wouldn’t have brought the enactment, the lands of farmers would have been used according to the previous law and they would not have received their compensation. When this law was passed, many in the government too raised their voice against this law. Even those who were involved in the making of the law, got upset and said that this law is neither beneficial to the farmers, nor the village or to the country. This law can be useful, it was said only to fill the treasury of the officers and for their enjoyment, to promote red-tapism. If this was the truth, apt modifications should have been done or not? Thus, we have tried to eliminate the drawbacks of the law and work on the direction of betterment of the farmers. Firstly, we have included the 13 laws which were excluded under the Acquisition of Land Bill, so that the farmers are provided with the remuneration and all rights and they do not have to incur loss due to the exclusion. I have heard the rumours being spread, that Modi government is passing a law, which will provide less remuneration to the farmers and they will not receive the full compensation.
My dear farmer brothers and sisters, I cannot even think of committing this sin. In the year 2013, under the dispensation of previous government, the compensation which was decided has not been modified a bit. We have decided to provide four times the compensation than the one provided earlier. Not only this, we have also included the 13 areas which were excluded in the earlier law. We have also continued with the clause that in case of acquisition of land for development of the city, the land owners will receive 20% of the developed land, so that they are benefited financially at all times. The youth of the family gets a job. We have also decided to provide employment to the children of the farmers. We have also added a new programme. The new addition is that the district authorities will have to announce that who will be employed from the family, in what field they will be employed and what will be their work location. Government will have to provide written announcement for the same. We have fixed the government responsibility by adding this feature.
My dear farmer brother and sisters, we all agree that the government land must be used first. Post this, the barren land must be used. Lastly, when there is no option left, the farm lands can be touched. So, we have started a survey for finding all the barren lands, for making it a priority for usage.
We have received complaints from our farmers that more than the required land is for use is gobbled up. With the enactment of this new law, I can assure you that before using the land, a survey will be conducted, and then it will be decided so that more than the required land is not acquired. Sometimes, in the foresight that something is going to happen, there is lot of damage. In the name of Social Impact Assessment (SIA), if these judicial proceedings are carried on for several years, how can a farmer take a right decision in this situation? He cannot decide whether to grow the crops in the field, as he is in a fix as he will keep thinking that the judgement can come any day. This will lead to two to four years of loss and things will be stuck due to red-tapism. Due to the long and difficult proceedings, a poor farmer is forced to beg before the officers to get their work done – Sir, please write this, please do not write this.... this is going to happen, that is going to happen. I do not want my farmers to fall prey to these officers. I do not think this is a right thing to do. Procedures were long and difficult. I have tried to make this procedure simple and easy.
My dear farmer brothers and sisters, the law was passed in the year 2014, but the states have not adopted the law yet. Farmers are still at the same place. States have opposed this law. Please tell me if I should listen to the states or not? I should trust the states or not? How can a country run without trusting its own states? So, I believe we should trust our states and we should specially trust our central government. One, I am willing to trust my states and secondly the improvement we are trying to bring in the law by trying to eliminate the drawbacks and trying to better the conditions of the farmers, even after this, if the states are not ready to support this movement, they are free to do so. That is why; I would like to request you all not to fall prey to these rumours. These rumours are absolutely ‘against farmer’ rumours. It is part of the conspiracy of keeping the farmers poor as always. This is a part of the conspiracy of not taking the country forward. We have to save ourselves from this conspiracy and save our country and save our farmers as well.
Now, if one were to ask the farmer residing in the village that what are your plans for your three sons? He will respond that one of them will carry on with the farming but the other two will have to seek jobs elsewhere. So, now even the sons of farmers are seeking out jobs. They too have to move out and seek employment somewhere. So arrangements need to be made for that too. So we have decided that whatever is important for the welfare of the village, welfare of the farmer and whatever is important for the employment of members of the farming community, all such things should be connected. We are the ones who believe in “Jai Jawan Jai Kisan”. Jai Jawan is related to the security of the country. As far as the security of the nation is concerned, the farmers of the nation do not ever step back from their responsibilities. If some land is required for national security we will have to ask the farmers for it. And I have complete faith that the farmers will give us the land. So we have added the clause for taking land for such purposes. I want to ask each and every member of the village, is road required or not? If water is required in the fields, don’t we need to create canals? There are still many poor families in the village who do not have a house to live in. Is not land required for construction of houses? Tell me is this for the industrialists? Is this land being demanded for the ultra rich? Try and understand the truth.
Yes, there is something I want to announce without a doubt. In the new ordinance too, any private industrialist, owner of a manufacturing unit, will have to follow the same set of rules that were laid out in the Land Acquisition Act of 2013. The rules for the corporates are the same as in 2013. Then why this lies are being spread. My farmer brother and sisters, misunderstanding is being created that you will not get your legal rights, that you cannot approach the courts. This is entirely false. No government at the centre can take away your legal rights. The constitution given to us by Baba Saheb Ambedkar ensures that you can approach any court in any part of the country. All we have done is to bring some sort of system to your doorsteps.
We have created an Authority. Now this Authority will work at district level and the issues of the farmers will be resolved at the district level itself by the Authority. And if you are not satisfied with the solutions offered there you can approach the courts as well. This is the arrangement we have made.
There is a misconception that the law related to returning the acquired land in five years has been scrapped. This is not true, dear farmer brothers and sisters, what we have said whenever a project is undertake, a timeline has to be specified in terms of the number of years in which it will be completed. If the project is not completed in the specified time period, then whatever farmer’s wish has to be adhered to. So we have set a timeframe for government projects. What is the today’s case scenario, those lands which were acquired about 40 years ago, the government has not done anything on them. This cannot continue any longer. We have decided to set a time limit to governmental projects. Yes there are projects which take time, maybe around 20 years. For example if 500 km long railway track is to be laid then it will take time. So we want it all written down, the time frame in which a project will be completed. So, what we are doing is fixing the liability of the government. We have fixed the government’s responsibility.
Let me also tell you something, dear farmer brothers. Those sitting in the air conditioned rooms who formulate these rules have no idea of the condition of the villagers. Whenever a dam is made or a reservoir is constructed, the rule is to acquire land till the point where there is a possibility of water getting to the maximum level in a span of 100 years. So the water gets filled once in 100 years. For 99 years no water gets filled. Yet the land lies with the government. What is currently happening in the states is that land has been acquired, compensation paid and yet farmers are working on those lands. If the land gets flooded once in 100 years, that year the land can be taken. The law of 2013 denied the farmers the right to cultivate the land. All we want is that if the land does not get flooded then it should be available for farmers for cultivation. And hence that land should not be acquired from the farmer. This kind of flexibility is necessary. So the farmer benefits even after giving up the land and also get compensation in lieu of their land. This will doubly benefit the farmers. This kind of organization is both necessary and practical. And we are the ones who have thought about it.
Another misconception being spread is that “consent” is not necessary. I urge you, my brothers and sisters to protect yourself from such politically motivated propaganda. The law which was promulgated in 2013 has no provision for consent in schemes for which the government is acquiring land. So people are being misled on this consent issue. The issue of consent did not exist previously, it does not exist now. And so my brothers and sisters, to say that it was beneficial for you before but it is not so now, this is an unfortunate attempt to mislead you. I assure and insist that this consent clause is very much functional in case of private industries, corporate and individual enterprise.
Another thing I would like to share that some people talk about the PPP model. Dear brother and sisters, if a road worth Rs.100 crores is made, will the corporate run away with it? The ownership of the road will be with the government. The ownership of the land is with the government. The construction agency is different. The construction agency is different because the government does not have the requisite amount of money. The government wants that a road be made in the village, as well as hospital and the poor children get education, so monetary investment is required. The private investors construct roads but not for themselves. He does not take it with himself; he makes it for the government. In a way he invests his money. This means in a government project someone else puts in the money which is called the PPP model. But the ownership rests with the government and government means of all of you, of the 125 crore Indians and hence we have said there that there is no need for a consent. Hence it was necessary for me to dispel these myths around the PPP model.
Sometimes this issue of consent will increase red-tapism and nepotism. Tell me, there is a village; a road has been constructed till that village, now a road has to be constructed till the next village which is 5 kms ahead. The road for the first village has been made, but the land for the road to other village lies with the previous village. So tell me will the villagers wilfully give land for road till the other village? Tell me will they give their consent? So what sin have the people of other village committed? Should they not get the roads? Similarly, if I am making a canal, this village has got the water and we have to provide water supply to another village and the said land falls with the people of the previous village who already have water and they deny giving their consent for acquiring their land and say that we already have the water, we are not going to give consent for land acquisition for supply of water to another village. So now you tell me, the people of the other village should get water or not?
My brothers and sisters, this is a practical issue. So we are evolving a process which does not take long. This is for the farmers’ right, not for industries and industrialists. It is for the betterment of the villages, the villagers and the benefit of their children.
Another issue is coming up. I have said this before. In every farmer family, the farmer wants one son to do farming and the others to take up other sources of employment. Such are the times today that different efforts need to be mad to run the household. If we make a road and government establishes an Industrial Corridor next to it, which is not private. I again reiterate that a Corridor by the government, not for the rich, or the industrialists, so if the government makes a Corridor on the left or right of a 50 or 100 km road, then all the residents of the near those villages – maybe 50, 100, 200 villages falling along it will have an opportunity for employment, their kin will get employment.
Tell me dear brother and sisters, do we want the children of our villages to suffocate in the slums of Delhi and Mumbai. Should they not get an employment opportunity closer to their home if a small industry comes up some 20-25 kms away from their village? So this corridor will be made by the government and will not be private. The government will make these Corridors and create these employment opportunities for the villagers. This proposal is about government ownership, it is for the betterment of the villages, betterment of the farmers of villages, it is for the betterment of the future generations of the villagers, it is for the betterment of the poor of the villages, it is to make electricity available to the villages. For these there were some drawbacks in the last Land Acquisition Bill, which we have tried to resolve all the shortcomings of this bill authentically. Still I have maintained in the parliament that if anyone feels that there are some short comings, we are ready to make amendments.
When we put the bill in the Parliament, certain leaders of the farming community gave us some suggestions and we added them. We still say that the land acquisition should be pro farmers. We are committed for this. There are lot of lies being spread. I request you, dear brothers to not get swayed and don’t make your decision based on these lies. Important issue is how to make farmers strong, how to make our villages strong. The farmer should get the right price for his efforts; farmers should get a proper market, a proper storage for his production. It is our effort to make right decisions for the betterment of the village and the farmers.
Dear brothers and sisters, it is our effort to see that the nation progresses and so do our farmers by increasing their yield. And so we have introduced “Soil Health Card”. If a person falls sick a laboratory test is undertaken for them, similarly a lab test can be undertaken for our motherland. So we are working not only to protect your land but also to make it healthy.
And so, not land acquisition, but making the land healthy is our task. And so we have introduced the concept of “Soil Health Card”. Every farmer is going to benefit from it. Your undue expenses on fertilizers will be saved. Your yield will increase. That you get proper price for your production, there should be proper granaries, proper rules and regulations and that you are saved from exploitation - we are working on all these issues. I remember, when I was the chief minister of Gujarat, I worked a lot in this direction. The condition of farmers in our Gujarat was very bad, we worked on the water issues and we saw a big change. The farmers made a huge contribution to the development of Gujarat which was beyond all expectations. The entire villages would be deserted, but the change happened. We want this type of change in the entire country, which makes our farmers very happy.
And so my farmer brother and sisters, today I got an opportunity to talk to you. But the issue of the ordinance is making headlines every day and I chose to speak about it more. But my dear brothers and sisters, I will speak to you again and on other issues. But I want to assure you that whatever you have written to me, I will shake the entire government and will make them see the reality about what is actually happening on the ground. I am happy that you have told me so many things and I believe that you have told me because you trust me. I want to assure you that I will not shatter your faith.
I desire your love and blessings at all times. You are the elders of the nation, you can never think wrong for others rather you will suffer loses for other’s benefit. This has been your tradition. And these farmers do not suffer, should have to be the prime focus of my government. Today, after hearing this “Mann ki Baat” many thoughts may have arisen in your mind. Please do write into me at the Akashvani address. I will talk again. Based on your letters, I will try to rectify all the mistakes of my government. I will try to speed up the efforts and if somewhere injustice is being done, I will try and provide justice.
We are in middle of the auspicious festival of Navratri. My Heartfelt Greetings to you All!
#DELIMITER#
13 3 2015, Sri Lanka
Address to Business Community in Sri Lanka
Business representatives from India and Sri Lanka,
Distinguished guests,
I am delighted to be here at the Ceylon Chamber of Commerce.
Thank you for coming here in such large numbers.
It is a real honour to visit Sri Lanka.
Over the course of these two days, I will meet people from all walks of life.
For me, this is one of the most important meetings in Sri Lanka.
This is because no matter how old and strong the relationship is, economic cooperation is often the locomotive that gives it momentum.
It is also important because for all of us in our region, the most important priority is transforming the lives of our people.
Our path will be determined by our economic choices and the quality of governance. But, business enterprises will remain critical for our success.
I often say that a nation`s fortunes are linked to its neighbourhood. There are many in India who would argue that India is too large to need her neighbours. There are many in our region who worry that India`s economic size will hurt them.
I disagree with both views.
For one, we all need a stable and peaceful neighbourhood to concentrate on national development.
I also believe that countries do better when the entire region moves together.
I said at the SAARC Summit that barriers of boundaries inhibit progress; international partnerships give it speed. That is why we see a rising tide of regional integration and cooperation across the world.
Our region is rich in resources. We constitute a large market. We complement each other. Therefore, our cooperation can be of huge benefit to all of us. There are already powerful examples in South Asia that show us that difference in size is no constraint to beneficial partnerships, if we use our strengths and seize our opportunities.
Bhutan benefits from hydropower exports to India. Nepal has significant manufacturing exports to India – in part driven by Indian investors. Infrastructure, energy, supply chains, traditional handicrafts, modern manufacturing, tourism and services – there are no limits to our possibilities.
I hardly need to tell this informed audience about the transformation unleashed in India over the past ten months. There is new purpose and clarity in our policies; a new vision for inclusive development; new standards in our governance; and, a new level of energy in our economy. Last quarter, India was the fastest growing global economy. We are confident that we can grow even faster.
The progress of one-sixth of humanity is a major economic opportunity for the world.
The global confidence in India has been restored. The world`s engagement with India is at a new level. But, the first claim on us should be that of India`s neighbours. And, I will be happy if India is a catalyst for economic growth in our own region. That is why I speak of a neighbourhood where trade, investment, ideas and people move easily across the borders.
And, as I said in Kathmandu, Nepal, in November, India will do its part for the region. We will work to integrate our markets more. We will make trade smoother and possible through the most direct routes. We will invest in regional connectivity. And, we will share our capabilities in science and technology with South Asia, from advanced medicines to disaster management or space science.
As a friend and neighbor, we attach the highest importance to Sri Lanka`s economic progress.
Sri Lanka is a nation of many achievements and great strengths. It has education, skills and enterprise. It has an excellent location. And, it has won peace now. Sri Lankan businesses have shown that they can compete with the best in the world. Our garments and tea industry know that!
We are pleased to be Sri Lanka`s largest trading partner and one its largest sources of investment. Our Free Trade Agreement in 2000 was a pioneering initiative in the region. It has given a big boost to our trade. Sri Lanka`s exports to India have grown sixteen times – yes, sixteen times – since then. This is impressive by any standards.
I know there are concerns here about the huge trade imbalance. I am prepared to work with you to address them. I want balanced growth in trade. We will try to make it easier and smoother for you to access the Indian market. That is part of my philosophy of ease of doing business in India. Our agreement on Customs cooperation is a step in that direction.
India is opening up to the world. We offer duty free access to Least Developed Countries, including in South Asia. And, India has Free Trade Agreements with ASEAN and others.
We should ensure that Sri Lanka does not fall behind in the changing and competitive world. That is why India and Sri Lanka should move boldly to conclude a Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement. You should also attract investments from India for exports to India. That should be the natural outcome of our proximity and your strengths.
Indian investments can also upgrade and expand your infrastructure. It is also natural that Indian investors are more likely to invest here because of familiarity and proximity. They are already here. And, I know that there are many large commitments in the pipeline. They are looking for your support.
During this visit, I am pleased with progress on Sampur Thermal Power Project and the Trincomalee Oil Farm. That is good for Sri Lanka`s energy security and for our partnership.
Sustainable development of the Ocean Economy can be a huge area for cooperation.
I also believe that when we connect the lives of people, we strengthen the bonds between nations. We have extended visa on arrival facility to Sri Lanka from April 14. We should do more to connect our countries by air and sea.
India and Sri Lanka were, in some ways, better connected in the past than we are now! In the past, a person could buy a rail ticket in Colombo and travel to Chennai by rail and ferry! Air India`s decision to launch direct flight between our capitals will help reverse that trend.
Tourism unites people and creates economic opportunities. India is already the biggest source of tourists here. We will work together to increase that flow.
In conclusion, let me return to the point I had made at the beginning. India`s progress gives us the ability to create opportunities for our neighbours. Our development partnership has injected commitments of 1.6 billion dollars in assistance from India. That has helped rebuild and upgrade infrastructure in Sri Lanka.
Today, we have offered another Line of Credit of about 318 million dollars for the railways sector. Reserve Bank of India has agreed to provide Central Bank of Sri Lanka a currency swap arrangement for 1.5 billion dollars. This will increase the stability of Sri Lankan Rupee.
It is not just in development partnership. We will also be supportive in advancing your commercial interests. I believe in Sri Lanka`s capabilities. We should engage more. We should open up to each other more.
We should move forward with greater belief in our own strengths; more trust in each other; and, with more confidence in the fruits of our partnership.
As I was saying before, Sri Lanka has the potential to be our most important economic partner in the region. We count on your support to make it happen.
Thank you and wish you all the best. Thank you very much.
#DELIMITER#
13 3 2015, Sri Lanka
Address to Parliament of Sri Lanka
Honourable Speaker of Parliament, Mr. Chamal Rajapaksa ji,
Honourable Prime Minister of Sri Lanka, Shrimaan Ranil Wickremesinghe ji,
Honourable Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Nimal Siripala De Silva,
Honourable Members of Parliament,
Distinguished Guests,
 30 PM Modi to Address Sri Lankan Parliament (4)
 I am truly delighted to visit Sri Lanka - a land of beauty, culture and friendship.
I am deeply honoured to be in this Parliament. I am conscious of its rich history.
This Parliament represents one of Asia`s oldest democracies; and, one of its most vibrant.
Long before many others in the world, Sri Lanka gave every individual a vote and voice.
To the people of Sri Lanka, ayubuvan, Vanakkam.
I bring the greetings of 1.25 billion friends; and millions of fans of Sri Lankan cricket.
I bring the blessings from the land of Bodh Gaya to the land of Anuradhapura.
I stand here in respect for our shared heritage; and, in commitment to our shared future.
Last May, when I took the oath of office, I was honoured by the presence of South Asian leaders at the ceremony.
Their presence was a celebration of democracy`s march in our region. It was also recognition of our common destiny.
I am convinced that the future of any country is influenced by the state of its neighbourhood.
The future that I dream for India is also the future that I wish for our neighbours.
We in this region are on the same journey: to transform the lives of our people.
30 PM Modi to Address Sri Lankan Parliament (3)
Our path will be easier, the journey quicker and destination nearer when we walk step in step.
As I stand here in Colombo and look north towards the Himalaya, I marvel at our region`s uniqueness – of our rich diversity and our common civilisational links.
We have been formed from the same elements; and, from our interconnected histories.
Today, we stand together as proud independent nations – sovereign and equal.
India and Sri Lanka do not have a land boundary, but we are the closest neighbours in every sense.
No matter where you look in India or Sri Lanka, the many strands of our links - religion, language, culture, food, customs, traditions and epics - come together into a deep and strong bond of familiarity and friendship.
Ours is a relationship that is beautifully defined by the journey of Mahindra and Sanghamitra. They carried the message of peace, tolerance and friendship more than two millenniums ago.
It is evoked by Kannagi, the central character of the great Tamil epic Silapathikaram, who is worshipped as goddess the Pattini in Sri Lanka.
It lives in the Ramayan trail in Sri Lanka.
It expresses itself in devotion at the dargah of the Nagore Andavar and the Christian shrine of Velankanni.
It is reflected in the friendship of Swami Vivekananda and Anagarika Dharmapala, the founder of the Maha Bodhi Society in Sri Lanka and India.
It lives in the work of Mahatma Gandhi`s followers in India and Sri Lanka.
Above all, our relationship thrives through the inter-woven lives of ordinary Indians and Sri Lankans.
Our independent life began at about the same time.
Sri Lanka has made remarkable progress since then.
The nation is an inspiration for our region in human development. Sri Lanka is home to enterprise and skill; and extraordinary intellectual heritage.
There are businesses of global class here.
Sri Lanka is a leader in advancing cooperation in South Asia.
And, it is important for the future of the Indian Ocean Region.
Sri Lanka`s progress and prosperity is also a source of strength for India.
So, Sri Lanka`s success is of great significance to India.
And, as a friend, our good wishes, and our support and solidarity have always been with Sri Lanka.
And, it will always be there for you.
For all of us in our region, our success depends on how we define ourselves as a nation.
All of us in this region, indeed every nation of diversity, have dealt with the issues of identities and inclusion, of rights and claims, of dignity and opportunity for different sections of our societies.
We have all seen its diverse expressions. We have faced tragic violence. We have encountered brutal terrorism. We have also seen successful examples of peaceful settlements.
Each of us has sought to address these complex issues in our own ways.
However we choose to reconcile them, to me something is obvious:
Diversity can be a source of strength for nations.
When we accommodate the aspirations of all sections of our society, the nation gets the strength of every individual.
And, when we empower states, districts and villages, we make our country stronger and stronger.
You can call this my bias. I have been a Chief Minister for 13 years; a Prime Minister for less than a year!
Today, my top priority is to make the states in India stronger. I am a firm believer in cooperative federalism.
So, we are devolving more power and more resources to the states. And, we are making them formal partners in national decision making processes.
Sri Lanka has lived through decades of tragic violence and conflict. You have successfully defeated terrorism and brought the conflict to an end.
You now stand at a moment of historic opportunity to win the hearts and heal the wounds across all sections of society.
Recent elections in Sri Lanka have reflected the collective voice of the nation – the hope for change, reconciliation and unity.
The steps that you have taken in recent times are bold and admirable. They represent a new beginning.
I am confident of a future of Sri Lanka, defined by unity and integrity; peace and harmony; and, opportunity and dignity for everyone.
I believe in Sri Lanka`s ability to achieve it.
It is rooted in our common civilisational heritage.
The path ahead is a choice that Sri Lanka has to make. And, it is a collective responsibility of all sections of the society; and, of all political streams in the country.
But, I can assure you of this:
For India, the unity and integrity of Sri Lanka are paramount.
It is rooted in our interest. It stems from our own fundamental beliefs in this principle.
Hon`ble Speaker and Distinguished Members,
My vision of an ideal neighbourhood is one in which trade, investments, technology, ideas and people flow easily across borders; when partnerships in the region are formed with the ease of routine.
In India, the growth momentum has been restored. India has become the fastest growing major economy in the world.
The world sees India as the new frontier of economic opportunity.
But, our neighbours should have the first claim on India. And I again repeat, the first claim on India is of our neighbours – of Sri Lanka.
I will be happy if India serves a catalyst in the progress of our neighbours.
In our region, Sri Lanka has the potential to be our strongest economic partner.
We will work with you to boost trade and make it more balanced.
India`s trade environment is becoming more open. Sri Lanka should not fall behind others in this competitive world.
That is why we should conclude an ambitious Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement.
30 PM Modi to Address Sri Lankan Parliament (10)
India can also be a natural source of investments – for exports to India and elsewhere; and to build your infrastructure. We have made good progress today. Let us get together to harness the vast potential of the Ocean Economy.
Our two nations must also take the lead in increasing cooperation in the South Asian Region and the linked BIMSTEC Region.
Connecting this vast region by land and sea, our two countries can become engines of regional prosperity.
I also assure you of India`s full commitment to development partnership with Sri Lanka. We see this as a responsibility of a friend and neighbour.
India has committed 1.6 billion U.S. dollars in development assistance. Today, we have committed further assistance of up to 318 million dollars to the railway sector.
We will continue our development partnership. We will be guided by your Government. And, we will do so with the same level of transparency that we expect in our own country.
Last month we signed the agreement on cooperation in peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
More than anywhere else in the region, I see enormous potential to expand cooperation with Sri Lanka in areas like agriculture, education, health, science and technology, and space. Indeed, we are limited only by our imagination.
We hope that Sri Lanka will take full benefit of India`s satellite for the SAARC Region. This should be in Space by December 2016.
People are at the heart of our relationship. When we connect people, bonds between nations become stronger. That is why we have decided to extend the visa-on-arrival facility to Sri Lankan citizens.
We will also increase connectivity between our countries. We will strengthen ties of culture and religion. Last month we announced reduction in fees for Sri Lankan nationals visiting National Museum in Delhi to see the Kapilavastu Relics. We will bring our shared Buddhist heritage closer to you through an exhibition. Together, we will develop our Buddhist and Ramayana Trails. My birth place Varnagarh was an international centre of Buddhist learning in ancient times. Excavations have revealed a hostel for 2000 students and in plans to redevelop the centre.
Mr Speaker,
A future of prosperity requires a strong foundation of security for our countries and peace and stability in the region.
The security of our two countries is indivisible. Equally, our shared responsibility for our maritime neighbourhood is clear.
India and Sri Lanka are too close to look away from each other. Nor can we be insulated from one another.
Our recent histories have shown that we suffer together; and we are more effective when we work with each other.
Our cooperation helped deal with the devastation of Tsunami in 2004. As a Chief Minister, I was pleased to share our experience in reconstruction after the Bhuj earthquake in 2001.
Our cooperation is also integral to our success in combating terrorism and extremism.
For both of us, local threats remain. But, we see threats arising in new forms and from new sources. We are witnessing globalisation of terrorism. The need for our cooperation has never been stronger than today.
The Indian Ocean is critical to the security and prosperity of our two countries. And, we can be more successful in achieving these goals if we work together; build a climate of trust and confidence; and we remain sensitive to each other`s interest.
We deeply value our security cooperation with Sri Lanka. We should expand the maritime security cooperation between India, Sri Lanka and Maldives to include others in the Indian Ocean area.
I often say that the course of the 21st century would be determined by the currents of the Indian Ocean. Shaping its direction is a responsibility for the countries in the region.
We are two countries at the crossroads of the Indian Ocean. Your leadership and our partnership will be vital for building a peaceful, secure, stable and prosperous maritime neighbourhood.
30 PM Modi to Address Sri Lankan Parliament (8)
In our deeply interconnected lives, it is natural to have differences. Sometimes, it touches the lives of ordinary people. We have the openness in our dialogue, the strength of our human values and, the goodwill in our relationship to resolve them.
Mr.Speaker,
Sri Lanka and India are at a moment of a great opportunity and responsibility – for realising the dreams of our people.
This is also a time for renewal in our relationship; for a new beginning and new vigour in our partnership.
We have to ensure that our proximity always translates into closeness.
We were honoured that President Sirisena chose India as his first destination last month. I am honoured to be his first guest here.
This is how it should be between neighbours.
Tomorrow I will go to Talaimannar to flag off the train to Madhu Road. This is part of the old India –Lanka rail link.
I recall the lines of a famous song ‘Sindu Nadiyin Misai’ composed by the great nationalist poet Subramanian Bharati in the early 20th century:
‘Singalatheevukkinor paalam ameippom’(we shall construct a bridge to Sri Lanka)
I have come with the hope of building this bridge – a bridge that rests on strong pillars of our shared inheritance; of shared values and vision; of mutual support and solidarity; of friendly exchanges and productive cooperation; and, above all, belief in each other and our shared destiny. Thank you once again for the honour to be with you.
Thank you very much.
#DELIMITER#
13 3 2015, Sri Lanka
Joint press statement with president of sri lanka
Your Excellency Mr. Maithripala Sirisena, President of Sri Lanka,
Members of the media,
I am delighted to be in Sri Lanka, in this beautiful city of Colombo.
I have eagerly looked forward to visiting one of our closest neighbours and a nation with which we share so much.
I am truly honoured by your warm welcome and friendship.
I am conscious of the significance of this visit. It is the first standalone bilateral visit to Sri Lanka by an Indian Prime Minister since 1987.
Last month, President Sirisena honoured us by making India his first foreign visit as President. I am glad to be here so soon.
This is how it should be between neighbours. We should meet regularly.
It helps us understand each other better; find solutions to mutual concerns; and, move our relationship forward.
That is what we achieved in my meetings with President Sirisena today.
Economic ties are a key pillar of our relationship.
The progress we have made reflects our shared commitment to stronger economic cooperation.
Our trade has seen impressive growth over the past decade. I am aware of your concerns about trade with India. As I said in Delhi, we will try and address them.
The agreement today on cooperation between our customs authorities is a step in that direction. It will simplify trade and reduce non-tariff barriers on both sides.
We are not just looking at addressing problems. We are also focusing on new opportunities.
Today, Lanka IOC and Ceylon Petroleum Corporation have agreed to jointly develop the Upper Tank Farm of the China Bay Installation in Trincomalee on mutually agreed terms.
A Joint Task Force will be constituted soon to work out the modalities. India stands ready to help Trincomalee become a regional petroleum hub.
I also look forward to early commencement of work on the ground in the Sampur Coal Power Project. This landmark project would meet Sri Lanka`s energy needs.
The ocean economy is a new frontier that holds enormous promise for both of us. It is a priority for our two countries. Our decision to set up a Joint Task Force on Ocean Economy is a significant step, especially because of our proximity.
People are at the heart of our relations. We have taken a number of decisions to encourage people to people contacts, improve connectivity, and increase tourism.
We will extend the facility of "Tourist Visa on Arrival - Electronic Travel Authorization” Scheme to Sri Lankan citizens from the Sinhala and Tamil New Year on 14 April 2015.
Air India will soon start direct flights between New Delhi and Colombo.
We will cooperate in developing a Ramayana Trail in Sri Lanka and a Buddhist Circuit in India.
27.5 PM Modi and President Mr. Maithripala Sirisena AT signing of agreements between India and Sri La (3)
We will organize a Festival of India in Sri Lanka later this year. Sri Lanka is where Buddhism has truly flourished. We will be organizing an exhibition showcasing our Buddhist heritage as part of this festival.
The Memorandum of Understanding on cooperation in youth affairs is an important long term investment in our relationship.
India is privileged to be a development partner for Sri Lanka.
We will provide a fresh Line of Credit of up to US$ 318 million for the railways sector. This will be used to procure rolling stock, and to restore and upgrade existing railway track.
We are pleased to provide assistance for the construction of the Rabindranath Tagore auditorium at Ruhuna University in Matara.
Tomorrow, I will visit, some of the projects, being financed by India, including the housing project. I am pleased that more than 27,000 houses have already been built.
The Reserve Bank of India and the Central Bank of Sri Lanka have agreed to enter into a Currency Swap Agreement of US$ 1.5 billion. This will help keep the Sri Lankan rupee stable.
We discussed the fishermen’s issue. This complex issue involves livelihood and humanitarian concerns on both sides. We should handle it from this perspective. At the same time, we need to find a long term solution to this issue.
It is also important that fishermen`s associations of India and Sri Lanka meet at the earliest to find a mutually acceptable arrangement. It can then be taken forward by both governments.
I also took this opportunity to convey our admiration for President Srinisena`s efforts to build an inclusive future for Sri Lanka.
I conveyed our sincere support and good wishes for Sri Lanka`s new journey of peace, reconciliation and progress.
We stand with you in your efforts to build a future that accommodates the aspirations of all sections of society, including the Sri Lankan Tamil community, for a life of equality, justice, peace and dignity in a united Sri Lanka.
We believe that early and full implementation of the 13th Amendment and going beyond it would contribute to this process.
I also conveyed India`s commitment to further strengthening our partnership in advancing peace and prosperity in our region, including our common maritime neighbourhood.
I would like to once again thank President Sirisena for the warm welcome and hospitality.
The meeting today has been very productive. It gives me great confidence and optimism about the future of our relations.
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
12 3 2015, mauritius
Commissioning of coast ship, Barracuda
Hon’ble Prime Minister Sir Aneerood Jugnauth, distinguished guests,
To our naval personnel from India, our guardian of the seas, who are here today – my special greetings to you.
19 PM MODI unveiling of plaque for Commissioning of Offshore Patrol Vessel Barrac (5) It is a great honour to commission the Barracuda today in the service of the National Coast Guard of Mauritius.
Thank you for giving me this privilege. Thank you for choosing India as your partner.
This ship has made a long journey – from Kolkata across the great arc of Indian Ocean to this beautiful shore.
Generations ago, people from India charted that course to a new destination and a new life.
Today, Barracuda brings with her the goodwill and greetings of the people of India.
She represents our unique trust and confidence.
She reflects our partnership that has stood the test of time.
She is a symbol of our shared commitment to peace and security in Indian Ocean- our common maritime home.
Barracuda is a beautiful ship. She is also very capable; and built to specifications of Mauritius.
Now, she sails proudly with the flag of Mauritius. She will protect your islands and your waters. She will be there to help in times of distress and emergencies.
But, she will do more than that. She will also help make our Indian Ocean safer and more secure.
In doing so, Mauritius will fulfill an important international responsibility because, the Indian Ocean is critical to the future of the world. This Ocean bears two-thirds of the world`s oil shipments, one-third of its bulk cargo; and half of its container traffic. Over three-fourths of its traffic goes to other regions of the world.
The vast Indian Ocean Region hosts over 40 states and nearly 40% of the world`s population. It touches Australia, Southeast Asia, South Asia, West Asia and the eastern seaboard of Africa. It sparkles with the gems of island states.
Think of the civilisational links, yet great diversity in this vast region! Consider the vast opportunities that it holds!
Today, the world speaks of 21st century driven by the dynamism and the energy of Asia and the Pacific. But, its course will be determined by the tides of the Indian Ocean. This is why Indian Ocean is at the centre of global attention more than ever before.
19 PM MODI unveiling of plaque for Commissioning of Offshore Patrol Vessel Barrac (6)
We also see growing global stakes and presence in the Ocean. Even in this changing world, the oceans hold the key to its fortunes. And, we will all prosper when the seas are safe, secure and free for all.
To ensure this will be our greatest collective responsibility. But, we will also have to rise to other challenges that are not uncommon in our region.
We have seen the tragedy of tsumanis and cyclones.
Terror has visited us from sea. Piracy has taken toll of lives and trade on a scale that seemed beyond belief in modern era.
Illegal fishing and oil spills hurt our economies. We all feel the rising impact of climate change on our coasts and islands.
We have also seen that instability and turmoil in coastal and island states can have profound impact on security on the seas.
India is at the crossroads of Indian Ocean.
Since Lothal in Gujarat became one of the earliest seaports in the world, India has had a long maritime tradition.
Our cultural footprints stretch across Asia and Africa. We see this in our strong Diaspora across oceans.
The seas forged links of commerce, culture, and religion with our extended neighbourhood across several millenniums.
Our more recent history has focused our attention on our continental neighborhood.
But, India has been shaped in more ways by the seas around us.
Today, 90% of our trade by volume and 90% of our oil imports take place through sea. We have coastline of 7500 km, 1200 islands and 2.4 million square kilometers of Exclusive Economic Zone.
India is becoming more integrated globally. We will be more dependent than before on the ocean and the surrounding regions.
We must also assume our responsibility to shape its future.
So, Indian Ocean Region is at the top of our policy priorities.
Our vision for Indian Ocean Region is rooted in advancing cooperation in our region; and, to use our capabilities for the benefit of all in our common maritime home.
It means many things.
One, we will do everything to safeguard our mainland and islands and defend our interests.
Equally we will work to ensure a safe, secure and stable Indian Ocean Region that delivers us all to the shores of prosperity.
And, our capabilities will be there for those struck by the ocean`s fury. Or, caught in distress on the seas.
Second, we will deepen our economic and security cooperation with our friends in the region especially our maritime neighbours and island states.
We will also continue to build their maritime security capacities and their economic strength.
19 PM MODI unveiling of plaque for Commissioning of Offshore Patrol Vessel Barracud (2)
Three, collective action and cooperation will best advance peace and security in our maritime region. It will also prepare us better to respond to emergencies.
That is why, in 2008, India promoted the Indian Ocean Naval Symposium. Today, it brings together 35 navies of the region. Our goal is to deepen our mutual understanding on maritime challenges; and, strengthen our collective ability to address them.
We also support efforts to strengthen our regional mechanisms for maritime cooperation – from dealing with piracy terrorism and other crimes; to marine safety and natural disasters.
India has also started maritime security cooperation with Maldives and Sri Lanka and we hope that Mauritius, Seychelles and other nations in the region will also join this initiative.
Four, we also seek a more integrated and cooperative future in the region that enhances the prospects for sustainable development for all.
We must promote greater collaboration in trade, tourism and investment; infrastructure development; marine science and technology; sustainable fisheries; protection of marine environment; and, overall development of Ocean or Blue Economy.
To me the blue chakra or wheel in India`s national flag represents the potential of Blue Revolution or the Ocean Economy. That is how central the Ocean Economy is to us.
For those who live by the ocean, climate change is not an issue of debate but a serious threat to existence. We must assume leadership in our region and call for a more concerted and fair global action to address the challenge of climate change.
Our Indian Ocean Rim Association can be an important instrument for pursuing our vision for a sustainable and prosperous future in the region.
We often define regional groupings around landmass. The time has come for a strong grouping around the Indian Ocean. We will pursue this with new vigour in the years ahead.
There can be no better place to host the Secretariat for IORA than Mauritius. I am pleased that the Secretary General is from India.
Five, those who live in this region have the primary responsibility for peace, stability and prosperity in the Indian Ocean.
But, we recognize that there are other nations around the world, with strong interests and stakes in the region.
India is deeply engaged with them. We do this through dialogue, visits, exercises, capacity building and economic partnership.
Our goal is to seek a climate of trust and transparency; respect for international maritime rules and norms by all countries; sensitivity to each other`s interests; peaceful resolution of maritime issues; and increase in maritime cooperation.
We seek a future for Indian Ocean that lives up to the name of SAGAR – Security and Growth for All in the Region.
We should be inspired by Monsoon, which nurtures and connects us all in region.
We will strive to unite our region in partnership, as we were once in geography.
19 PM MODI unveiling of plaque for Commissioning of Offshore Patrol Vessel Barrac (8)
An Ocean that connects our world should become the pathway of peace and prosperity for all.
It is no coincidence that I speak of our hopes for the Indian Ocean Region in Mauritius.
Our partnership with Mauritius is among our strongest maritime relationships in this world.
Our partnership will grow. We will together build our capabilities. We will also train and patrol the seas together.
But, the foundation of this partnership is larger. It is our shared values and a common vision.
It is our willingness to look beyond our own domain to assume our responsibility for the region.
Mauritius is a key leader for a secure and sustainable future for the Indian Ocean. We in India are proud to be your partner.
Thank you very much, and wish you all the best.
#DELIMITER#
12 3 2015, Mauritius
National Assembly of mauritius
Madam Speaker, Mrs. Santi Bai Hanoomanjee,
Prime Minister Sir Aneerood Jugnauth ji,
Leader of the Opposition Mr. Paul Berenger,
Members of the Assembly,
Greetings on the Independence Day of Mauritius!
It is always a great honour to speak to a National Assembly.
17 PM Modi's Address to the National Assembly, Mauritius (4)
But, it is truly special to do so in the Assembly of a people with which we share the deepest bonds of history and culture; and, of a nation that we are proud to call a friend and a partner.
To be here with you in this Assembly on your National Day is a blessed moment for me.
On Independence Day, we not only celebrate liberty, but also remember the struggles and sacrifices that gave birth to freedom.
Today is also a special day in the history of India`s freedom struggle.
On this day, in 1930, Mahatma Gandhi began his Dandi March.
And, India took a great step forward to Independence.
Your National Day honours Mahatma Gandhi. And, it forms a deep bond of emotion between our two countries.
Today, I also pay homage to Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam for leading Mauritius to freedom, and for his vision and leadership in building our partnership.
I stand here today not just in celebration of our relationship, but also in admiration of your achievements.
17 PM Modi's Address to the National Assembly, Mauritius (7)
There are many countries that have seen the joys of freedom fade into the gloom of lost direction.
In Mauritius, though, the hopes and promises of independence have become brighter by the passing day.
Mauritius has stood as a bright beacon of democracy.
This is a nation of a little over a million people of huge diversity living in great harmony.
It is a nation that has lived up to the words of its national anthem – one nation, one people, in peace, justice and liberty.
It is a nation moving firmly on the path of prosperity.
I have always admired how Mauritius has made smart choices; and encouraged hard work and enterprise.
It has gone from an agricultural economy to a middle income and diversified economy, tapping the opportunities in textile and tourism and now to offshore finance and information technology.
Generations ago, people from India charted an unknown course to an uncertain new life in an unfamiliar world.
As they built their lives, they lived on the memories of Himalaya and Ganga; through the rituals of Shivratri and Kavedee; the colours of Holi and the joy of Eid; through songs that welcomed the rains and dances that celebrated the harvest.
Today, they are proud citizens of Mauritius; thriving in the dynamism of their country; contributing to its success.
The island pulsates with the beauty of their preserved beliefs and culture. Yet, they blend easily into a way of life that has been formed by the winds and waves from different parts of the world.
This morning I went to Ganga Talao. I felt a personal connection that comes from the banks of Ganga in my parliamentary constituency - Benaras.
And, I understood the powerful links of heart that have endured time and distance in this magnificent land.
Today, these links form the firmest foundation of our relationship. They have created goodwill and warmth rarely seen in international relations. They have built an unbreakable chain of trust between us.
Today we are equally proud to have a relationship that speaks to the needs of our times. We relate to each other from the comfort of our shared democratic values. We are partners in our economic progress. We shoulder our shared responsibility to advance security in the Indian Ocean. We speak in one voice in the cause of the developing world and the future of our planet.
I see Mauritius as a leader in the Indian Ocean Community and as a bridge to Africa.
Your leadership is helping promote Hindi in the world. India thanks you for hosting the World Hindi Secretariat.
Madam Speaker,
This is the wealth of our inheritance. This is the richness of our partnership.
Last year, we had democratic transition in both countries. There are two things that are similar to both.
After a long time a single party won absolute majority in both countries.
And, in both Parliaments – this is very interesting – in both Parliaments, I have the honour to say “Madam Speaker”!
We know that democratic changes make no difference to the strength of our relationship.
What we now have, though, in both nations is a stable platform to speed up economic development.
Over the last nine months, we in India have moved with a clear vision of inclusive development. We have acted with speed, resolve, innovation and boldness to increase economic growth; reform our economy and transform the lives of our people; and create opportunities for the most excluded youth, the remotest farmer and the farthest village.
I am confident that under Prime Minister Jugnauth, development in Mauritius will become more impressive.
And, I can assure you that as always we will be with you – in support of your efforts and in joy for your success.
Yesterday, I told Prime Minister Jugnauth that we understand the importance of the offshore banking sector for your economy. We are conscious of its dependence on India. We will work together for our shared objective to avoid the abuse of our double taxation avoidance convention. I thank you for your support. But, I also assure you that we will do nothing to harm this vibrant sector of one of our closest strategic partners.
It has been a great privilege to be a development partner for Mauritius. We will always be ready to do more, in accordance with your wishes.
17 PM Modi's Address to the National Assembly, Mauritius (6)
Yesterday, we announced a new Line of Credit of 500 million U.S. dollars for the development of civilian projects in Mauritius.
Prime Minister Vajpayee had supported the construction of the first cyber city in Mauritius in 2003. That became a symbol of our thriving economic partnership. I am pleased to announce our support for a second cyber city in Mauritius.
While we are on the subject of information technology, the e-health project in Mauritius is a laudable initiative. And, we would be happy to support its development.
We are honoured to be Mauritius`s partner for meeting its petroleum requirements. We are embarking on a new project to build the petroleum storage facility here. This will further strengthen the position of Mauritius as a regional economic hub.
Mauritius has shown great vision in the development of its ocean economy – from fishing to tourism.
India is also highly dependent on the seas. We are seeking to develop our marine economy and discover new possibilities. We are doing this in a sustainable manner that preserves the delicate ecosystem of our oceans. Indeed, the oceans hold vast potential to advance our prosperity and meet the challenges of the world.
That is why I consider the blue chakr in our national flag as a symbol of Blue Revolution; just as saffron represents Energy Revolution, white the Milk Revolution and, green the Energy Revolution.
This offers a great opportunity for cooperation between our two countries. We can learn from you. Together, we can better understand our marine ecology and the new opportunities. We can improve our ability to pursue more sustainable practices.
Our partnership must also cover the challenge of climate change. For India, it is a mission that we are pursuing on an entirely new scale and with a new sense of urgency. We have set an ambitious target of 100 Gigawatts of solar energy and 60 Gigawatts of wind energy by 2022. We will seek to dramatically increase our energy efficiency, which is the cleanest form of energy.
This is a choice that is driven by commitment to the future, but also by principles.
And for me, it is an Article of Faith.
We are the inheritors of an ancient tradition and wisdom that elevated preservation of nature to a sacred duty; that worships Earth as a mother; and, that treats reckless exploitation of nature as a crime.
Mauritius has been a leading international voice on climate change, not just as an advocate for island states, but for the sake of our collective future. We look forward to working with you for a more resolute global action against climate change.
We can pursue our dreams of a sustainable and prosperous future if we are confident about peace, security and stability in our world.
For India and Mauritius, our destinies are linked by the currents of the Indian Ocean.
Our security partnership has been a strong pillar of our relationship. And, it has stood the test of time.
It is founded on unmatched mutual confidence and trust.
It is rooted in the responsibility to each other that comes naturally from our friendship.
It stems from our shared commitment to peace and prosperity in the Indian Ocean Region.
As Mauritius seeks to make islands and waters safer; as you seek to secure your vast Exclusive Economic Zone, we will always be there for you.
We will deepen our cooperation. And, we will also do everything we can to strengthen your own capabilities.
17 PM Modi's Address to the National Assembly, Mauritius
Later today, I will have the honour to commission the Barracuda into the service of your National Coast Guard.
Today, proudly flying the flag of Mauritius, she will sail as a symbol of our partnership.
India is grateful for the faith you have placed in us.
And, as Mauritius assumes greater responsibility for securing this part of the Indian Ocean, we know that our region will be a safer place.
But, we share a broader vision for lasting stability and prosperity in the region.
We believe that all nations in our region should come together to shoulder our shared responsibility.
We seek a comprehensive partnership of closer security, economic, cultural, scientific and people-to-people ties in our region.
That is why we are grateful that Mauritius hosts the Indian Ocean Rim Association. Your leadership will remain important to realize our vision. Your steadfast support in global institutions gives us more strength to speak on our common interests. Now, as the United Nations reaches its 70th year at a time of great turmoil, we seek your support to reform this institution to make it more relevant to the needs of our age.
I want to thank Mauritius for the strong support for United Nations Resolution declaring June 21 as the International Day of Yoga. This resolution was passed by a record co-sponsorship in a record time frame.
This is a tribute to our shared heritage. I know you will celebrate it with fervor in Mauritius.
Madam Speaker,
In the life of a nation, as in the life of an individual, there is nothing more precious and satisfying than a true friend and well-wisher; nothing more comforting than his embrace; nothing more valuable than his trust; nothing more reassuring than his support; nothing more enriching than his partnership.
So, we are blessed to have your friendship. And, I always say that if there is one country that has full claims on us, it is Mauritius.
It a relationship of our hearts and sentiments. And, it will never be limited by boundaries.
We in India will do everything to nurture it.
This relationship will always be a source of great joy and strength to our two countries. And, it will also be of immense value to our region and our world.
Thank you for this honour. Once again, I give you my best wishes on this National Day.
Thank you very much.
#DELIMITER#
11 3 2015, Seychelles
Joint press statement with president of sychelles
Thank you, President Michel, for your kind words.
I am deeply touched by your extraordinary hospitality and warmth.
I regret that this is a very short visit. I would have loved to stay longer. Anyone who visits this wonderful country will find it hard to leave.
Short it may be, but this visit has been very productive.
It is no surprise that Seychelles is my first destination in the Indian Ocean Region.
We regard Seychelles as a vital partner in our Indian Ocean neighbourhood.
Our relationship is unique and special. It is founded on deep sense of mutual trust and confidence. It is marked by a spirit of respect and equality; and enormous goodwill and warmth.
It draws strength from our shared values of democracy and inclusiveness. It is nurtured by a common purpose - progress of our people and peace and prosperity in the Indian Ocean Region.
Seychelles has made impressive progress. It has shown that size is no barrier to the scale of achievements.
This visit and my conversation with President Michel have reinforced my conviction in the strength and the importance of this relationship.
Our security partnership is strong. It has enabled us to fulfill our shared responsibility to advance maritime security in the region.
It is a privilege to be a partner of Seychelles in the development of its security capabilities.
Today, I am pleased to announce that we will be giving one more Dornier aircraft to Seychelles.
Later today, I will have the honour to launch the Coastal Surveillance Radar Project. This is another symbol of our cooperation.
These steps will enable Seychelles to secure these beautiful islands and the vast expanse of waters around them. Seychelles will also continue to make an enormous contribution to the safety and security of the Indian Ocean Region.
Our agreement today on hydrographic survey adds a new dimension to our maritime cooperation. I thank Seychelles for their confidence in India.
We also hope that Seychelles will soon be a full partner in the maritime security cooperation between India, Maldives and Sri Lanka.
President Michel and I also underlined the importance of comprehensive cooperation in the Indian Ocean Region. We expressed support for a more active and productive Indian Ocean Rim Association.
Our development partnership is also a strong pillar of our relations.
Our agreement today on the development of infrastructure in the Assumption Island gives a strong boost to this partnership.
We are pleased to be a partner in development of human resources and capacity building in Seychelles. Indeed, Seychelles is one of the largest recipients of Indian assistance in this area. We intend to expand this further in the future.
Seychelles is a leader in advancing the concept of Blue Economy. We also believe that the Ocean Economy is indispensable to meeting our future challenges.
Today, President Michel and I have agreed to establish a Joint Working Group to expand our cooperation on the blue economy.
This cooperation will increase our understanding of marine ecology and resources. We will improve our ability to harness new possibilities of the ocean in a sustainable and balanced manner.
This is a major step in advancing our scientific and economic cooperation.
We stressed our support for expansion in our modest trade and investment relations. We are confident that we can achieve it, especially as Seychelles looks to a future in which information technology and services play an increasingly important role.
I also expressed hope that Seychelles would be able to quickly utilize the committed 75 million dollars in grants and credit in accordance with its priorities.
We deeply value the close and warm ties between our people. I welcomed the launch of direct air services to India by Air Seychelles last December.
We have decided to grant free visas for three months to the citizens of Seychelles. We will also extend to you the facility of visa-on-arrival.
I thanked President Michel for his Government`s consistent support to India in international forums. This includes the endorsement for India`s permanent membership of the United Nations Security Council.
We had strong convergence of views on climate change. We are two nations that are vulnerable to its impact. And, we are deeply committed to combating it.
We stressed our shared commitment to strong national action. We also called for a strong and ambitious global effort, especially from the developed world, on climate change.
I reiterated our consistent support to the position of the Small Island Developing States. Equally, I renewed India`s strong commitment to our partnership with Africa.
Our relationship is a powerful example of warm friendship and productive partnership. For India, this relationship means a lot.
This visit has reinforced the special warmth in our ties and taken our strategic partnership to a new level. I am grateful to President Michel and the people of Seychelles for this.
I look forward to the visit of President Michel to India at the earliest.
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
8 3 2015, India
International Women's Day
On International Women’s Day, I salute the indomitable courage and stellar achievements of women. 
Today, we renew our pledge to make women an equal and integral part of our development journey. My Government has initiated several measures aimed at bringing about a positive change in the lives of women. That is central to our vision of India`s progress and a life of dignity and opportunity for all our citizens. 
The ‘Beti Bachao, Beti Padhao’ Yojana seeks to usher in a paradigm shift in attitudes towards the girl child and places emphasis on educating the girl child. The Sukanya Samruddhi Yojana will provide support for marriage and education of young women. MUDRA Bank will help thousands of women achieve financial independence. 
The Union Budget which has been presented recently, unveils broadbased social security schemes such as the Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana, Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Bima Yojana and Atal Pension Yojana. These will benefit women in a big way. 
Our heads hang in shame when we hear of instances of crime against women. We must walk shoulder-to-shoulder to end all forms of discrimination or injustice against women. The Government is setting up One-Stop-Centres that will provide assistance, legal advice and psychological counselling to women who face violence or abuse. The Government is also commencing a mobile helpline to enable women to dial 181 for access to counselling and referral services. 
I seek the support of one and all, in transforming our vision into reality. 
#DELIMITER#
3 3 2015, India
Motion of thanks to president's address in rajya sabha
Honourable Chairman Sir, 
We had a detailed discussion on the motion of thanks to the honourable President’s address. I am also here to reply to the honourable President’s address and with a request for this house to pass this motion of thanks to horourable President’s address with a consensus. 
All the honourable members have communicated their ideas in detail during the discussion. I am grateful to all. This is a fact that this house is a Council of States. There are lots of members amongst us who have represented a particular state and during their time of representing that state, public mood was somewhat different than what it is today in the prevailing situation. Now the political situations have changed. People have changed their decision. And in that sense, from the perspective of Council of States, the representation of the sentiments of the people of those states, representation of the sentiments of the government of those states which the people have elected is a must and this is natural as well. What is more important is the state which we represent rather than the party we are representing and it is our responsibility to represent the state in the position in which it is today. And in that sense, this house will definitely honor the public opinion. The people have given mandate with a great expectation to run the government and although scope for criticism and arguments is always there, it is our collective responsibility to cooperate with each other for the betterment of our country, and I believe that we will not go back in carrying forward this collective responsibility. 
Secondly, threats have neither worked nor will work in democracy. I used to receive many letters for 14 years threatening to put me in jail but here I am standing in front of you today. I am well aware of those games but I do not want to speak on those. It is going to be embedded in the pages of history. And therefore, everybody knows about the character of the people who use threat as a tool. In the same democracy, during the emergency, we are aware of kind of oppression was done. Is there any bigger threat than that but the country refused to bow down to those threats. Therefore, please do not put words which were never said in someone’s mouth. The country should run according to the existing laws and within the ambit of existing laws. 
And lot of members in this house have same objection that we are just promoting the old schemes with new names. I said that in the other assembly and I am repeating it here that this debate that schemes are new or old will drift us further apart. The issue is that problems are long-standing. The real worry is about the problems and finding solutions to the problems. And we don’t believe that we are the only experts to resolve these issues. We do not have the thinking that since we are sitting in this position so God is bestowed us with complete knowledge. We too have several drawbacks. But by coming together we can solve the problems. And this is the strength of democracy. Nobody can claim to be complete. But if we come together, there is quite a possibility of being complete. But if God is not willing still there can be some shortcomings in overcoming the problems and hence our thought is that we alone cannot achieve everything. 
Therefore, may be this assembly has never heard before, and probably it is my true statement that never ever any member of this house would have heard, while having control on Treasury Bank, they have praised and acknowledged the contribution of others for their role in the development of this country. How can they acknowledge role of others in the development of nation, when they are not willing to give anyone credit in freedom movement. But it was me, who announced from Red Fort, that this country has move forward due to the contribution extended by all previous Governments, Prime Ministers and State Governments. You can refer to my old speech delivered in this house only, wherein I had affirmed these words with great responsibility and pride. We don’t believe that the country came into existence on 15 August 1947. This country is legacy of thousands of years. This country has been in existence owing to it sages, saints, teachers, workers and farmers, and not by governments. Governments will keep changing. People like us will come, run the system and the leave. 
And therefore I request you to please do not force us to live as per your approach or as per the thought process which is within you, which you have lived with. Please do not force us to live with the perspective you have lived with which we have never followed and please do not try to test us with the same approach as you used to do. You said that I am just limited to explaining the schemes. I can go further, even up to till the years of 84-86, but I will not waste that much time. 
At the time of NDA government, there was a scheme named “Multipurpose National Identity Project”. You brought “AADHAR UIDAI” – it was the same scheme with a new name. During Atal ii’s time, there was “Sampoorna Grameen Rojgaar Yojna”, you brought “Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act”. During Atal ji’s time, there was “Freedom of Information Act”, you brought “Right to Information Act”. During Atal ji’s time, there was “Antodaya Ann Yojna”, you brought “National Food Security Act”. During Atal ji’s time, there was “Sarv Shiksha Abhiyaan”, post 86th Constitutional Amendment, you brought “Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act”. 
During Atal ji’s time, there was “Swarnim Jayanti Gram Swaraj Yojna”, you brought “National Rural Livelihoods Mission”. During Atal ji’s time, there was “Total Sanitation Campaign”, you brought “Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan”. During Atal ji’s time, there was “Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority”, you brought “Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority Act”. 
Honorable Chairman Sir, there were some political talks here as well. I heard talks like “who is he”, “who are they” or “how many”. I would like to draw the attention of this house toward this issue. In political life, taking decisions on mere Perception always has chances of errors and you know where you have reached by doing so. And therefore it is very important to understand the ground realities in political life. We cannot move on the basis of Perception only. I just heard Venkaiah ji saying that majority of farmers and dalits etc. are with us. 
Today, on one hand BJP represents Ladakh, on the other hand it represents Kanyakumari. If it represents Kutch on one side, the other side it represents Arunachal Pradesh. And therefore you can see BJP representing the regions across Kutch to Kanyakumari. Earlier they used to think that we are limited to Hindi Belt only but today you can see that we have successfully formed government in Southern India also. We also know that we have been accused of being party of upper classes only, but after seeing me, you must have to change your thinking. 
There are few states with highest tribal population, like Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Rajasthan and Gujarat. And the tribal society of these states have voted for Bhartiya Janata Party. You also know that Goa – where decisive voters are from Christian society – BJP is ruling there with full majority. Nagaland – where maximum voters belong to Christian society is having BJP Government. Jammu & Kashmir – where decisive voters are Muslims – is having BJP government. Punjab, with majority of Sikh community as decision makers also has our government from so many years. 
So these are the regions being ruled by BJP and therefore, ground reality must be considered that now BJP has emerged as a party, which is widely acceptable across different regions. And therefore the perception based on which you are bringing your point forward is the thing of the past. We are well aware of the era when the ancestors of our Sitaram ji used to tell people that that vehicle which is running on your blood and not running on petrol. We have heard such dialogues long ago. So do we need to pay attention to these kinds of dialogues in today’s world? Time has changed and therefore I wanted to ask this. 
I am thankful to Sharad ji that he has delivered what I have been thinking. And please spare some time to read my book namely “Samajik Samrasta”. I have explained your emotions in detail, and you will be quite happy to read it. I am not saying that you will also enjoy the same happiness. I totally acknowledge what Sharad ji said. Is the sanitation campaign is a program for corporate sector or for rich people only? The poor society of India, living in huts, is craving for quality of life. Can’t we provide them hygienic atmosphere? And therefore I think of them when I run such campaigns. I talk about honour of our mothers and sisters. Due to Jan Dhan Yojana, poor people are able to open their bank accounts. Is this a corporate program? This program is not associated with rich people or corporate world. The issue of toilets in schools, which schools are covered under this programme? The schools where poor children are studying, for example, a driver’s son goes to this type of school. There are no toilets. I am working hard to resolve this issue. Is this a program for rich people or corporate world? I talk about Soil Health Card. Who are covered under it? Poor farmers having small piece of land. I talk about Per drop–more crop. Why? Since he is a small farmer, and is having small piece of land. How can he produce more crops? I am working hard in this direction. Is this a program for corporate world? Will rich people make money from it? 
We auction Coal Blocks to earn money. The eastern belt of India is full of natural resources. Be it Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal, Assam, Poorvanchal - these states are full of natural resources, take Orissa despite having so much natural resources is not able to come out of poverty. Shouldn’t we try to improve take them out of poverty? Is the western part is the only part entitled for development? I am pained that country cannot move further until balanced development is done in all regions. 
So, the money generated from Coal auction, will be used in the upliftment of the states, who are in possession of coal. This will give the poor a chance to fight against poverty and will help the states to develop. Is this happening for the rich? Is this taking place for the Corporate World? 
Clean Ganga: 40 percent of the country’s population is directly or indirectly financially connected with the river Ganga. For some, cleaning Ganga, would be a matter of devotion. For some, it would be an environmental issue, but cleaning Ganga, is also a massive economic programme, on the whole. It has the strength to awaken the country financially. This can help the poor to bring a change in their lives financially. This government is only determined to serve the dejected poor class of the society. 
Skill India: Anand Ji was sharing the facts, I don’t intend to share the same, and various committees were formed, various missions were set, many came and many left, I don’t want to talk about this, but all the successful countries, too, are focussing and working towards the goal of Skill Development. It is our responsibility that we use our demographic dividend in the most appropriate manner. If we have the demographic dividend, we have the hands, but we also need skills along with the hands. Having mere hands will not serve the purpose, we need hands with proper skills. I believe, if the youths of our country have skills, it can act as a strengthening catalyst for reaching new heights in the country. Therefore, we are focussing on the poor children, who have left their studies after 5th or 3rd grade, should be provided with Skill development programme. 
Housing for All: Who are these people, who do not have houses to live in? Are they Corporates? These people are none other than, the poor citizens of our country. We are trying to provide them houses, by building 3 crore houses in the villages and 2 crore houses in the cities, by the year 2022, when we will celebrate the pure Indian independence. We will always move forward to make to dream come true. There is no requirement of any political agenda for making this dream true, we will also ask the congress rulers to support us in this venture and provide houses to the poor. This venture is not a part of Government programme, but this is a programme for the poor citizens of our country. Therefore, we are focussing on this problem. 
I am sure, you all will support us, in moving forward with the goal of upliftment of the poor. We all can see that, intelligent people do different analysis, but in our entire budget, 42 percent devolution is for the states that comprise Indian economy, we need to think about them. When we speak of the development of nation, it is high time to combine the state’s and nation’s riches and its time to see the policies in a perspective. You are the representatives of the state. This is the Council of States, where huge devolution has been provided. Once the money is utilised in the infrastructure and development of the state, it will lead to economy generation. I would like to request all the respected representatives of the states, to utilise any huge amount of money, in the right direction of development of the state, which will help the state to develop on the whole and bring an end to all the problems. 
We have come up with a new MUDRA (Micro Units Development and Refinancing Agency) scheme in our current budget. We want to know that who runs the economy in our country in reality? We have not researched on this issue. The common men of this country are the one who provide jobs, perform jobs, as well as run our country’s economy. We have the auto-drivers, auto rickshaw repairer, auto rickshaw owner, scooter repairer, cycle repairer, boot polisher, fruits seller, bread seller and many more. These are all common men of our country, who provide 5.5 crore jobs to the Poor and 11-12 crore jobs on the whole. This is not a small amount. They have the capability to provide jobs to people. But, it is highly disappointing to see that there is no organization from where these sectors can take funds if required. 
They borrow money from the money lenders on 120% interest and spend half of their lives in paying the interest. For the first time, our government has formulated MUDRA scheme, wherein these sectors will be benefited with funds with institutional arrangements and they will be able to develop themselves financially. I believe, other factors related to financial development will also be affected by this new scheme and will lead the nation to new heights. 
Who are these people? About 54 percent of the population are conducting small scale business in the rural sectors. 46 percent of the population are running their business in the cities. More than 60 percent of those who are involved in these businesses, are Scheduled Caste or Schedules Tribe or OBC. This implies that if we try to focus on this backward sector of the society, I believe that they can move ahead in their development at a very high pace. We are trying to provide jobs to these backward sector of the society. Till now, the Institutional Finance, which have been provided to them.. 
Respected Chairman Sir, this assembly comprises of all the senior citizens. These citizens are much more experienced, hard-working and have contributed a lot towards the development of our nation. I am quite new in this assembly, Thereby requesting you to assist me in this situation. 
Respected Chairman Sir, out of 125 crore of population, 29 crore citizens have Life Insurance policy. Only 10 crore citizens have Accidental Death Cover Insurance. Only 6 crore citizens have the Organized Pension Scheme Cover. Other than this, under the BPL category, a widow or any other senior citizen has the pension scheme ranging from 300 INR to 1500 INR. This is a very common scheme in our wide nation. We are trying ways to find a solution to a very big problem in our country. And, I believe we are trying to reach all the sections of our society with the help of Prime Minister Safety Insurance Scheme, Prime Minister Life of Light Scheme and Atal Pension Scheme. We are planning to simplify these schemes. 
With one rupee every month and for citizens under the age group of 18 to 70 years, we can generate Accidental Death Cover insurance of 2 lakh rupees. I believe, considering the present scenario of our nation, we are worried about poor citizens of our country. Under Prime Minister Life of Light Scheme, we can generate 330 rupees, which is one rupee per day, and citizens under the age group of 18 to 50 years, can use the benefits of this insurance without any medical tests. Not only this, Rs. 2 lakh risk coverage will be provided to the family, in case of death under normal circumstances as well. 
Atal Pension Scheme, Under this pension scheme, after 60 years, any citizen who requires a pension of one, two, three, five thousand or any other amount, this pension plan will work as per the pension amount required. If a 20 year old opts for this scheme and requires a pension amount of Rs. 5000 after 60 years, then he is required to contribute Rs. 248 per year till the age of 60, and he can get the pension of Rs. 5000 per month, throughout his life. In case of death, his wife will be benefited with the pension amount. In case of death of both mother and father, their children will be refunded the deposited amount of Rs. 8.5 lakh. Our nation’s requirement of Social Security and its awareness will be fulfilled through this scheme. We have tried out best to uplift our society with the safety and satisfaction among the senior citizens in their last stages of life. Our country’s farmers believe “I slog day and night, will get old and then will be eventually separated by our children. If I had pension...” So, with the help of this scheme, even the farmers will be benefited, housewives….So, if children leave them in their old age, or if they don’t have children, they can still continue to avail the benefits of this pension scheme. 
We have also come up with a new sovereign Gold Bond scheme. Even after independence, our gold’s Hallmark is run through some or the other foreign Hallmark. This is very disappointing that our country doesn’t have its ownGold Hallmark. So, with this sovereign Gold Bond, we will have our own gold coins, biscuits, Ashok Chakra emblem and we can reach everywhere around the world. There are a few things, which are directly connected to our dignity and self-respect, which will act as a powerful weapon for our country. When we speak of Sovereign Gold bank and for example, we speak of 20 thousand tonnes of Gold, this might lead Anand Sharma to stand up and narrate the quantity of gold mentioned by me. To this, I would say, this is just a way to speak. 
We are unable to use the available gold in our country, gold monetization; it is merely present as a dead money in our country. It will be a great driving force to uplift the nation’s economy with its circulation. So, we are eliminating the policy of half kilo gold from our country. Citizens can keep any amount of gold, borrow money and go ahead in their lives. I believe, with this venture, a huge amount of gold in the form of dead money will provide an enormous boost to our nation. In the same manner, we want to proceed with the Sovereign Gold Bond. It is not mandatory to buy gold in the form of metal, but you can also buy gold in the form of paper. Eventually, you will be refunded the amount according the present gold rate, once you return the paper gold. This will also support in the import-export balance in our nation. I believe our country will be immensely benefited with this scheme. 
I believe, a country requires good ideas and customs for positive development. We cannot expect a positive outcome, with just good ideas or just good customs. We need a combination of both ideas and customs, which will lead the country to the path of upliftment. Therefore, we are striving to adopt and develop a work culture, which will help us in achieving our goals. 
Shri. Ghulam Nabi ji and Shri Anand ji have raised the issues of transfers of officers, which is very disappointing. I am observing that people are so distressed, just like a gram seed dries off in water. They are in great pain, as they have been transferred. I would like to say that, we should look into our own reflection in mirrors, before giving such sermons. 
Your government was formed in the year 2004. You had dismissed the Cabinet Secretary, as soon as the government was formed. 
Your government was formed in the year 2004. You had appointed Foreign Secretary without considering the convention of seniority. 
Your government was formed in the year 2004. You had dismissed the Home Secretary straightaway. 
Your government was formed in the year 2004. You had even dismissed the efficient Defence Secretary in one moment. 
Not only this, you had insulted the governors, kept them in darkness and dismissed them. We haven’t done anything like this. I may address to Ghulam Nabi ji, an ex- Health Minister, wherein a secretary from your department had received a Nobel Prize from UN for polio. You had dismissed him, while he was receiving the award from UN. So, we need to decide, what all can be revealed here in the assembly. Even though I am new here, I have a huge treasure of information with me. 
And therefore, we have decided and we are keenly determined to move in the direction of Good Governance. One more fact has come up into consideration that we have received some from our supporters, some from those who think positive of us and some from those who have special love for us. And, I have received a lot of love from many of who have bestowed special love. 
“We can see nothing on the ground. I really admire Modi ji’s statements, his way of thinking, but I am unable to see any result on the grounds.” I would like to say to my supporters that you have been in government for ages and are intoxicated with Power. I pray to God to save all of us from that intoxication of power. As, when we are addicted to Power, the addiction becomes quite high, so when the head is quite high above the ground, we are unable to look down and see the ground level. I believe, the more you look down, the more you connect with people, so I would like the people here who have asked about ground to understand how the work is done. 
Railways and Highways, both are run by the Government. However, there has, always been a clash between the two, as the Railways would never allow more than 350 projects of Highways and, the latter would never give permissions to Railways for more projects. Some need to build a railway line across the road line and some need to build an over bridge across the railway line. There were 350 projects, we came and we noticed and asked both the departments to sit across the table and clear all the misunderstandings and got a MoU signed between the two, and today I am happy to announce that we have introduced an Online Portal for the same. Online clearances are now being provided. The projects, which were stuck in these departments for the past 350 years, stand all clear now. Now, if any new project is undertaken, it has been decided to clear the same within 60 days. At present, we have just 22 projects in hand, which are under process. This is a pure example of Good Governance and this is how a work is done. 
Let me give you the details of the work done on the grounds. I will speak of the UPA first, wherein 7.4 Km per day of highway were awarded, but only 5.2 Km per day used to be achieved. Anand ji, let me give you the accounts of work done within 9 months now. We award the work of 18 Km per day, and we have received the reports that we achieve 10.1 Km per day. Its double and this is how a work is done, and government can run on the ground level. 
Railway: 
2013-14-New line- UPA- 390 Km. 
New line- 9 months- NDA 2410 Km. 
2013-14 - Gauge Conversion - 585 Km. 
Our 9 months - 700 Km. 
UPA - doubling - 675 Km. 
Our - 810 Km. 
I am trying to convey that we are connected to the grounds of our country, and I am sure you will be able to see the results on the ground through our work. 
Adarsh Gram Scheme: I would like to convey my special gratitude and appreciate the work of few respected members of the parliament. About 600 members have joined hands and supported in this work with all their hearts. I have been informed, I love to speak about people in this way, especially, if I have to speak of our Respected Motilal ji Veera, he has done a tremendous work in a village called Mohali, Chhatisgarh. He took initiatives to open Jan Dhan accounts for all the Ration card holders, connected the people with Aadhaar Cards, built committees for safeguarding government distribution, so that the poor can be benefited through PDS system. Respected Motilal ji has worked on these important grounds. 
So, if the members of the parliament take such initiatives and interests, it can help the villages to transform with a new developed shape. I have all the information about the members. I would like to mention the name of our member, Kamakhya Prasad from Jorhat, who has come up with perfect safety schemes for ICDS and mid-day meals, so that the children can get proper meals. Our own Aviation minister, Shri Ashok ji, who has adopted a village in Andhra Pradesh, took a pledge and surrendered himself to eliminate the prevailing alcohol intake in the village. The village members were used to drinking alcohol and have the licence for alcohol shops. If we have the support of all the members, we have move forward in the path of Good Governance and achieve our goals. 
You must be aware of the Labour practices, wherein our labourers who had slogged day and night, and should be allotted the amount of Rs. 27,000 crores, which is not a small amount, but they are unable to receive the amount. Why? As some labourers are paid just Rs. 50, Rs. 100 or Rs. 200, and they cannot stick to just one place for work. If he relocates to some other workplace, he has to bear extra fare for reaching the old workplace for receiving the payment of Rs. 50 or Rs 100. There are no accounts of the labourers, who died for any reason. There is no proper account of their payments and our government treasury has Rs. 27,000 crores, which belongs to the labourers. 
We have tried to formulate the UAN (Universal Account Number) policy. With the help of this UAN policy, labourers will be receiving their payments in their accounts, irrespective of their location. With this, the labourers will be able to receive their pending amount of payment, from the treasury of Rs. 27,000 crore, which is lying with the government. This money belongs to the Poor and is it their rightful money. The government doesn’t want to use this money for any other cause, we want to pay the money back to the labourers. I believe, this is a result of Good Governance and will have a positive impact in the development of our nation. 
If we speak of Prime Minister People’s Money, I don’t want to take much of your time for discussing the same. 
We have been discussing MNREGA repeatedly. What I spoke in the last assembly, I would not be repeating the same here, as that has been registered appropriately and has been addressed. Now, I would like to talk about Aadhaar Cards and MNREGA. I don’t want to criticize and make comparison between them. But, I have the strength and culture to say that, all our governments have contributed to the development of our nation. Our country must have faced various obstacles in reaching what we are today, nonetheless, huge contributions have been done. Let us speak of the working of Aadhaar cards: 
In 45 months under UPA, which is almost 3.5 years, 7 crore Aadhaar settlements took place. 
In 9 months under NDA, 17 crore settlements took place. 
So, we can see the difference between 45 months and 9 months. 
You have to compare between 45 months and 9 months. 
In 45 months of UPA government, 5,000 Aadhar cards were linked with MNREGA. And at the time NDA government, 8 Lac Aadhar cards have been linked with this scheme. Now compare 5000 in 45 months versus 8 Lakhs in just 9 months? 
At the time of UPA, 1.7 Crore Aadhar cards were linked with Job Cards. We have added 5 Crore people in 9 months. Compare 1.7 Crores versus 5 Crores? 
And therefore, I said that both policy and practices needs to be developed. 
We talk about MNREGA and job guarantee for 100 days for poor people. During 2013-14, average days of employment under this scheme were 42.5 days only, which is well short of 50%. 
And how many persons got jobs for 100 days during 2013-14? Only 6.35%. and when this issue was brought to the notice of honorable Supreme Court, it was admitted by UPA government, that they have no audit report for the expenses incurred, amounting to Rs. 1 Lakh Crore in the last five years in MNREGA. This affidavit has been filed by you in Supreme Court. 
We talk a lot about plans, discussions related to it, credit, rules and strict laws. Nation wants us to do the best, for the benefit of poor people and try to improve the life style of a common man. And you will see that in 9 months that the government is working in the same direction. 
Respected Mayawati ji has discussed about Bundelkhand. Bundelkhand is divided into two states – Madhya Pradesh & Uttar Pradesh. An amount of Rs. 3,760 crore was disbursed for six districts of Madhya Pradesh. At the same time, an amount of Rs. 3506 Crore was disbursed for seven districts of Uttar Pradesh. Madhya Pradesh spent 96% amount out of it and you can see the results. Bundelkhand connected to Madhya Pradesh has shown a drastic improvement in wheat yield from 1,629 kilogram per hectare to 2,323 kilogram per hectare. The amount given has been used for irrigation of 1,42,000 hectare land. Milk production has improved from 9 Lakh ton to 12 Lakh ton. Around 561 milk cooperative societies have been initiated. Drinking water consumption has improved from 40 litres per person to 55 litres. Since you belong to Uttar Pradesh, I would not like to share the progress report for the Bundelkhand connected to Uttar Pradesh. Maybe your concern is quite genuine, but I have shared the facts about other part connected to Madhya Pradesh. 
We had a discussion on Bengal also. There are some people who are trying to run this country with imported ideology. They ruled the Bengal for 30 years. But Derek, I won’t blame you for the current situation. You can do what you want but the CR should remain OK. In the past 30 years, the image of West Bengal, which once was known as capital of industrial activity in India, and Kolkata, which was once known as industrial capital has been completely destroyed. West Bengal was one of the industrial development leaders for agricultural growth. In last 30 years, agricultural growth is reduced to minus figures. West Bengal’s share in industrial development is reduced to 4% from 10%. During 1976-77, 7.6% percent of total factories were running in Bengal which was reduced to 4% in 2008-09. During 1966-76, Industrial growth was 17.3% which was reduced to 7.8% during 2001-07. During 2007 National sample survey, it was observed that Bengal is the most affected state suffering from starvation. Only 60% schools have functional toilets for girl compared to national average of 75%. 
Yesterday, Sitaram ji was discussing about closure of Nokia factory in Chennai. The nation wants us to create jobs and we have to try our best in this direction. To complete this task, we have to promote ‘Make in India’ campaign. Speed of infrastructure will decide job opportunities, and to increase the job opportunities, we should focus on infrastructure. 
Yesterday, Shri Sitarajm ji had shown concern for closure of Nokia factory in Chennai and for 25000 employees who lost their job. I would like to state that this factory was not closed down due to our government’s policy. It has been closed due to certain steps taken by the previous government. I acknowledge your concern. Yes, 25000 employees have lost their job. But I would like to assure you, that we have taken necessary steps. And we hope that Nokia will resume shortly and jobs will be created. So we are already working in this direction. 
The President, in his address has talked about Digital India. Honorable Chairman Sir, It is true that once there was a global theory of haves and have nots. I believe that in the coming days, digital divide could be one of the reasons for poverty and backwardness. Therefore, nation must not face the situation of Digital Divide. And to stop the Digital Divide, we need to associate even the poorest of the poor with digital technology. India is having more than 90 crore mobile users and is likely to touch the 100 crore mark very soon. We wish to introduce mobile governance. 
How can the poorest of the poor become a part of this system? 
And when we talk of Digital India, we should aim to take the BPOs from centers like Hyderabad, Mumbai, Bangalore, Chennai and Ahmedabad to the North East where the youth is well versed with the English language and can speak it fluently. We are trying our best to proceed in that direction to arrange for a regular means of income for the youth. 
Everyone has also expressed their concerns over the issue of Black Money. This is the topic where nobody ever has expressed their thoughts before. Only we kept talking about it. And we had a lot of figures at that time. I believe that when Supreme Court had ordered to form SIT, back in 2011, our dream of extracting all the money stashed away in foreign banks would have been possible. However, SIT was not formed as the time as there were vested interests. If SIT was formed at the time, and all the procedures had started, it wouldn`t have been as difficult and time consuming to bring back the money. And I believe that even now all money stashed abroad must be brought back to the country. We are doing whatever legally required to address this issue. Also, whether it is about the G-20 summit, or about the dialogue with Switzerland or talking to America about MoU, we are on signing a MoU to exchange information with the world. One after other new countries are joining this movement because without proper information we won`t be able to fight this battle. 
On the other hand, Indian citizens will have to declare information about any property or wealth that they have stashed away on foreign shores, as per the new laws. As a result of this, things will come into light and it is in this manner that we plan for bringing back the black money. We will complete this procedure and we must do this! 
All the respected members present here have expressed their concerns over land acquisition. This is a gathering of seniors and I assure all of you that under this scheme, I have ensured from Day 1 that if there is anything against the farmers of the country, we are ready to correct it. But what has been promulgated has its flaws because we were a participant in that. We won`t deny that we had not done this. If we had done something good then don’t give credit to us but there has been a wrongdoing, then we too are responsible for it. But now we should come out of it - for the betterment and development of the country. And I don`t want to make into an ego issue or play politics here. 
We will need land for irrigation in order to ensure that the farmers have enough water for their crops and thus thePrime Minister`s Krishi Sinchai Yojana will be a success. We will need land to make roads in villages and also to make houses for the poor under the Rural Housing scheme. And there is no provision in our current laws. Hence I request you not to spread rumors that there is a deduction in compensation. No one has ever tweaked the rules of compensation before. As decided the compensation will remain the same and there won`t be any decrease in that. But the law was made in 2013. What happened? It was implemented in January, 2014. The rule was implemented in Haryana in the month of July despite the fact that Congress was the ruling party there. They refused to give the compensation as decided by the rules made under the law. 
Not just that, we made these laws in Maharashtra where Congress was the ruling party. This means that states are finding it difficult to function as per these laws...I am not talking about Congress or BJP here...but they are definitely facing problems and finding it difficult. And all the states have expressed their despair, and as this is the Council of States, it is our duty to protect all states. And it is our first responsibility of this council to act upon the concern that the states have expressed and ensure that law does not prove to be a burden on the states and rework it according to the hopes and aspirations of the respective states. 
The law will stay, we have to remove the flaws. If there is any flaw in that, then we will have to remove it as well. And I invite you all to come and help us in our quest of evolution tour to develop the country. And no matter how intelligent we are, we should consider the fact that the laws that have helped the country develop and also served the farmers of the country from 1894 to 2014, a total of 120 years, would not have lost its efficiency overnight. We have to think about the farmers of our country and strive to protect them but we have to do it together and this is my insistence. 
There`s another misconception that is being spread, perhaps not intentionally but due to wrong information. I request you to not do this. The government has no intention to deduct anything from the 67% promised coverage for the poor. Some are spreading rumors about the decrease of coverage from 67 % to 40%, I believe that this will not happen and I request you to refrain from spreading such rumors and trouble us. This devolution that has happened...the work assigned to them was the restructuring of Food Corporation of India. See there are 50 different types of reports that comes to the government. You also must have submitted reports, but it is not on the basis of reports, the government only conveys its decision. I only inform you about the government`s decision. And I believe you are the connected with government`s decisions. Another thing is that due to this 42% devolution, the following changes will be seen...Derek ji, West Bengal will get Rs. 22,000 crore extra, Andhra Pradesh will get Rs. 15,000 crore extra, Orissa will get Rs. 8,000 crore extra. Likewise, I can tell all the extra money that every state will be getting but for now, I have brought the list of only 3 states. The budget features a comprehensive list comprising of Telangana as well. Everyone is getting 42 percent. 
Now the biggest thing about the rise of royalty on minerals that has been increased by 1.5 per cent which is going to benefit mostly the eastern regions of the country. Not only that, the money raised by the coal auctions will also be given to the states. Till date, 19 coal mines have been auctioned and more than Rs 1 lakh crore has been generated from the same. This money will also be given to these states. According to the calculation, of the total amount received, the bulk 62% will be with the states and only 38% will be with the center. This is a proper procedure that is being implemented and hence some people advice that it needs to be verified. 
Not only that, Foreign Policies were also discussed. In the current scenario, it is safe to assume that as opposed to earlier, the world is divided into different parts now. The dynamics of the camps of this world has changed over the years. To protect the supreme interest of India is the centre point of our foreign policy. I had said this before the elections, post it and even after becoming the Prime Minister of the country that the world needs to realise the greatness of India. As far as the foreign policy is concerned, our stance would be to build relationships with the world. We want to build deeper bonds with the neighbouring nations. However, we will be at par with the rest of the nations and never be subdued in front of them in order to build good relationships. However, we will also not be dominant. We just want to be at par with the other nations and develop healthy and fruitful relationships with all of them. 
We are working in that direction and you will be happy to know about the return of Father Prem`s return from the clutches of the terrorists in Afghanistan which cannot be termed as an ordinary event. And in the past 9 months, 12000 Indians that have been stuck in various parts of the world have been retrieved back to the country. The nurses from Kerala, who were stuck with the terrorists, have also been brought back to the country, safe and sound. The government had provided them with air tickets to their home state. 
Another important discussion was the issue of Jammu and Kashmir. I want to assure the house and also 125 crore Indians that the government formed in Jammu and Kashmir is on the basis of Common Minimum Programme and will continue to function with the same idea. We can`t support it on the basis of someone`s statement. The government will go forward with a zero tolerance policy towards terrorism. But if we continue to react to every statement made, I believe that we will not proceed in the correct direction. We are proceeding with our rules and plans. 
I will tell this clearly that the voters of Kashmir have not only honored democracy by coming out in maximum numbers to vote but they have also sent out a loud and clear message to the world about Kashmir. And hence, the fact that India had been advocating since the past 50 years, Kashmir voters had managed to put a seal of approval on it. Hearty congratulations to them! I congratulate the citizens of Kashmir. And we place our trust in the citizens of Kashmir and for the trust that they have placed in us, we promise to protect the unity and integrity of the country. And hence, once again I would like to say through the medium of this house and the head of the house that we assure that we will follow the proposals for the betterment of Kashmir, approved by the councils of India. There will be no compromise on the subject and I assure this to the people of the country. 
I would once again request the assembly to approve the President`s speech, of his proposal of vote of thanks with consensus. I would like to thank everyone.
#DELIMITER#
22 2 2015, India
Mann Ki Baat
Hello, my young friends. Today probably the entire day you must have been preoccupied with the ongoing cricket match. On the one hand you have exams and on the other this world cup, you might be asking your younger sister to tell you the score of the match from time to time. Sometimes you must be elated about the fact that Holi is around the corner and then suddenly you would be feeling disappointed that even Holi festivities will go in for a toss. Why? Because the exams are approaching and I am sure you must be feeling this way. But friends, I am there with you in your moment of crisis. This is an important occasion for you; hence I am there to offer my support. I am not here to lecture you; I intend to have some light conversations with you.
You have been studying hard and you are tired. Mother scolds you and so does your father and teachers. God only knows what all you have to hear day in and out. Keep the phone, switch off the TV, entire day you are glued to the computer- everyday you must be hearing the same things. Be it the class X or the class XII, the whole year long you might be getting to hear the same things. And you might be sincerely wishing that sooner the exams finish better it will be, isn’t it? I understand your mental condition and hence I am here to share Mann ki baat with you. But this topic is a little difficult.
As far as today’s topic is concerned, the parents might be wishing that I touch those issues that they cannot discuss with their children. Teachers must be wishing that I say the right things to the kids and the students might be wishing that I say things which might ease the pressure at home. I do not know who will benefit from my conversation but I will have the satisfaction to know that I was there with my young friends in the most important occasion of their life, that I was sharing my inner feelings with them. This is my idea behind the conversations. I do not have the right to guide you on how to write a paper or how to pass the exams well. I cannot guide you on the tricks to obtain better marks because I consider myself an average student on such issues. I have myself never scored well in any exams in my life. I was a very average student and on top of that I had a very bad handwriting. So I think that most of the time I passed the exams as the teachers could not comprehend my handwriting. Well so much for the light talks.
But today I want to definitely tell you something important. How you approach exams goes a long way in deciding the results of your exams. There are many people I have seen who view this as the most important challenge of their lives and they believe that a failure here means failure for life. But friends, this is not so, and so don’t take undue stress.  Yes, you must be determined to get good results. The determination should be strong and the motivation high.  But the exams should not be a burden. This is not the exam which is going to test your performance in life. So do not bother much about it.
Sometimes, don’t you think we tend to make exams a huge burden and the reason behind this is that if we have friends and relatives who have children studying in the same class as your child, if your child and your relative’s child are also in class tenth, then there is constant comparison? There is a feeling that our child should fare better than everyone else’s child, even your friend’s child. And it is this constant comparison that creates a pressure on your child. You feel that your child earns a name amongst the family and friends. But is it really his name or your own prestige that you are worried about? Don’t you feel that you are the one responsible for making your child a part of an undue competition? Can’t we associate him to larger vision and greater meaning of life? How does he cope with the competition to be same as your neighbor’s friend circle? And is this really what you want? Just give s thought on it? Just think, in trying to compete with others, how you have belittle your own child’s life. Is it fair? When you talk to children, talk about big dreams, talk of greater heights that can be achieved and you will see a change happening.
Friends, there is something that always bothers us. We always measure our success in comparison to others. Our entire energy is spent in useless competition. There are many points in life where competition is necessary but for self development competition with others might not be a good motivator but competing with oneself each day should be the primary motivation. So start competing with yourself, compete with yourself to do better, to do faster, to do more and to reach new heights. Concentrate on compete with yourself to make today better than the past. And you will find that this spirit of competition will give you such a lot of joy and satisfaction that you yourself can’t imagine. We remember the athlete Sergei Bubka very fondly. This athlete broke his own records over 35 times. He would test himself only. Every time he would set himself a new challenge and scale new heights. You also follow the same and then see that nothing can stop you from achieving success.
Dear friends, even students are of different types. Some people, irrespective of the exams they may face, they are always happy about it, while some just collapse under the burden of exams. And some keep hiding behind the books in some corner of the house. But despite the type, exams are still exams and it is necessary to pass in them and I also wish that you pass well. But sometimes you must have noticed that we are seeking some causes externally. We seek reasons outside when we are confused about ourselves. We do not have faith in ourselves as if we are giving some exam for the first time. If someone is watching TV and the pitch is loud, we get irritated. If the mother calls for food we are irritated, but at the same time if our friend calls up, we end up chatting for an hour. Don’t you think that you have some confusion about yourself?
Friends it is important for you to identify yourself. Just keep doing simple things; you do need to go far. If you have a sister or your friend has a sister and who is appearing in X or XII standard exam, just observe them. You will see, whether it is X or XII, the girls will definitely help the mothers in the household chores. Have you ever thought that how do they manage to do work and yet score well in exams. Nowadays the girls are far ahead of boys in examination results. Just observe this around you.
This will make you realize that issues that bother you are not external. Sometimes the reasons are internal. If you are in self doubt then confidence cannot help. And that is why I say that as confidence dips, blind faith starts to envelope us and we then start seeking excuses outside.  Some students are such that we call them Aarambhishura. Everyday a new thought, everyday a new desire, everyday a new resolution, and then this resolution dies an early death and we are left where we started. I clearly believe that these ever changing desires are called whims by the people. Friend, family and relatives make fun of you and hence I would suggest that you have fixed desires. These desires in turn will become resolutions. And resolutions can never be futile. Resolutions are accompanied by goals. And when goals and action come together, resolutions are achieved. That is why I say Desire + Stability = Resolution. Resolution + action = achievements. I have complete faith that in your life too achievements will be at your feet if only you dedicate yourself. Dedicate yourself to your commitment and keep it positive. Don’t be bothered about defeating others. Think of taking yourself further from where you already are. And so test yourself everyday against your own limits, so that however big a challenge in life comes, we will not have any problem. And why should someone else take our exam?  Make it a habit to take your exam yourself. Each day we will test ourselves. We will see if we have progressed from where we were yesterday. Have I reached further than yesterday, have I achieved more than what I achieved yesterday. Each day, every moment, keep testing yourself.  Then such tests will bother you no more in life. Every exam will be an opportunity to test and regulate oneself and someone who can regulate himself knows to face challenges boldly. And so who sets himself challenges of life finds these classroom exams very small.
Sometimes we far exceed our own expectations. Just try and remember the good works that you have done. You will be surprised at your own achievement. Last year you were sick and yet you got good marks. Last year your uncle got married, one full week got wasted but still you managed to score very well. Earlier you would sleep for six hours and then last year you decided you will sleep for only five hours and you did it. What advice can Modi give you? You become your own advisor and as Lord Buddha said Uppa Deepo Bhavahah.
It is my belief that one should recognize one’s inner light, recognize one’s potential. Those who set themselves a new limit each time are the ones who scale greater heights. Secondly, sometimes we are busy thinking about the distant future.  Some people live in the past. Don’t do so during your exams. During examinations it is better to be in the present. Does a batsman anytime try and recall when he was out for a duck. Or does he think whether we will win this entire series or not. Once he enters a match does he think that I will come out only after hitting a century? Not really. In my opinion a good batsman is focused on the ball he is facing. He does not think of the next ball or of the match, or of entire series. You also fix your mind in the present. To win there is only one formula. Live in the present, connect with the present. Victory will be yours.
My dear friends, do you think exams are meant to exhibit your capacity. If this is what you think then you are wrong. Who do you have to show your capacity? Who do you need to demonstrate it to? You should think that these exams are not to demonstrate your capacity but to realize your own potential. If you make this basic mantra your calling, your confidence will get a new boost. Once you realize your potential and understand yourself, then you yourself will keep fostering your strengths this strength will translate into a new potential and so don’t take exams as a medium of exhibition, take it as an opportunity. This is an opportunity to know oneself, to explore oneself and to be living with oneself. So live on, my friends.
Friends I have seen that there are many students who become nervous during exams.  Some go to the extent that look today was my exam and Mama did not even wish me. Uncle did not wish me and elder brother did not wish me. And probably this issue is debated for an hour or two in the family- who did not wish, who called up to wish, did he send flowers or not. Friends rise above all this, do not get involved in all this. Think about all this when exams are over. If you have faith in yourself then such things will not arise. I have seen that many students become nervous. I know that some people have the tendency to become nervous. Some families have such an environment. I believe that the reason for nervousness is the lack of faith in oneself. How do you get this faith in yourself- if you gain mastery in your subject, you have worked hard and have done multiple revisions. If you have the confidence that you have mastery in some subject, you will see that out of the 5-7 subjects there are only 2-3 topics for which you are never worried. Nervousness is about some one or two topics. If you have mastered the subject you will not be nervous.
All the hard work that you have done in the past year, all those books that you have studied through the night they will not go waste. It will be there somewhere in your mind. As soon as you sit on your examination desk it will come back to you. You should trust your knowledge, your information. Have the faith that all the hard work you have done will certainly bear fruit and secondly be confident about your strengths. You should have the faith that however difficult the exam is, you will crack it successfully. However lengthy the exam is, ‘I will successfully complete it’. You should be confident about the timing, be it a two hour or a three hour paper that you will finish it before time. I still remember, maybe you have been told too, our teachers instructed us to do easy questions first and tackle the difficult ones later. I believe someone must have told you the same and I believe that you will follow it.
Friends, I have received many suggestions and experiences on MyGov.in. I will pass them on to the education ministry but I would like to mention a few things here.
Arnav Mohta writes from Mumbai, Maharashtra that some people make these exams an issue of life and death. As if entire world will finish if one fails these exams. Vinita Tiwari writes from Varanasi that the news of children committing suicide on the declaration of these results saddens her. You too must be hearing such news, but I have got good response from it from another gentleman. Mr. R Kamath has send in some good words. He has asked the students not to become worriers but warriors. Really we should not sink in worries but should be a warrior in the battlefield. I believe that we should not drown in our worries; we should march ahead with the belief that victory will be ours. Life is very long. There are ups and downs but one should not perish with them. Sometimes, unwanted results are an indication to move forward. They give us the opportunity to find new strength.
I have also witnessed another thing. Students as soon as they are out of the examination hall, they start estimating how they fared. Friends and family too ask the same question. How was today’s paper? Whatever is finished is over, please forget about it. I would also request the parents not to ask such questions. As soon as he gets out say, oh the glow on your face says that you have done well. Ok good…. Let us go and prepare for tomorrow. Create this mood and friends I also tell you… what will be the impact if you calculate and come to know that two questions are wrong and you would lose 6 marks, then tell me will it not impact your performance the other day? So why waste time on this? Why waste your energy on this? After all the exams are over, whatever calculations you want to make you are free to do them. How many marks will be scored, that should not be your concern at the time of exams. After the paper finishes concentrate on the next day’s paper, forget the day’s paper and you will see your burden lessening by 20-25 %.
Quite a few thoughts are rising in my mind. I do not know if they will be useful now that the exams are near. But I would like to tell my educator and academician friends that can’t we celebrate a week long exam festival twice in a year in each term. It should have a sarcastic poetry session, or a cartoon competition, a debate competition. There should be someone to lecture on the psychological aspects of exams so that this tension around the exams gets eliminated. If exams become a celebration then the students would not need to spend time like the way they are doing today in hearing this out. The students will themselves become confident. Also I believe that while teaching the syllabus, a separate lecture should be conducted on topics pertaining to exams. This environment of tension is not conducive.
Friends, I know that whatever I am telling you, you must have heard a lot more than that. Your parents must have lectured you, so must have the teachers. I do not want to confuse you by talking more on this subject. I want to believe that all the sons and daughters of this land who are going to give exams remain happy and joyful and give exams with a free mind.
I am talking to make you happy. You will get good results .You will be successful, make exams a celebration, give exams in a joyful mood, enjoy achievement each day, and change the entire atmosphere. Parents, teachers, and school –all should get together and experience what it is like to challenge the challenges, how wonderful it feels to convert each moment into an opportunity. And remember you cannot please everyone in the world.
I had a penchant for writing poetry, I had written a poem in Gujarati, I don’t remember it fully but I had written in it- if successful then you are worth being envious of, if failed then you are nowhere.”This is the way of the world. Be successful, not to defeat others but to overcome your challenges, be successful for your own pleasure. Be successful for bringing pleasure to the lives of those others living in this world.
I have this faith that you will succeed with happiness in your heart. You will have great success. And then, whether we could celebrate Holi or not, whether we could attend uncle’s marriage or not, whether I could attend friend’s birthday party or not, could see the Cricket World Cup or not- all these things will become immaterial, as for now your dimensions of happiness will be very different. My best wishes to you. Nation’s future is as bright as your own future. India’s future will be defined by India’s youth; it will be defined by you. Be it the sons or daughters, both have to work in tandem to take the country forward.
Come make the exam festival into a celebration. My best wishes to you!!!
#DELIMITER#
18 2 2015, India
Aero India Show, Bangalore
My ministerial colleagues, Distinguished participants and guests
I am delighted to participate in the 10th edition of Aero India.
More than 250 Indian companies and more than 300 foreign firms are here.
There are defence ministers, senior officials and hundreds of business leaders from around the world.
A big welcome to each of you!
This is the largest ever Aero India. This reflects a new level of confidence within our country and global interest in India.
To many of you, India is a major business opportunity.
We have the reputation as the largest importer of defence equipment in the world.
That may be music to the ears of some of you here. But, this is one area where we would not like to be Number One!
Our security challenges are well known. Our international responsibilities are evident. We do need to increase our defence preparedness. We do have to modernize our defence forces.
We have to equip ourselves for the needs of the future, where technology will play a major role.
As a nation of one billion people, we also have huge requirements for managing internal security.
We are increasingly integrating technology and systems into it.
These opportunities make Aero India an important international event.
For me, this is not just a trade fair for defence equipment.
This is a mega meeting of one of the largest global supply chains, with the most advanced technology and complex equipment
And, a platform to launch India`s defence manufacturing sector.
A nation with a strong defence industry will not only be more secure.
It will also reap rich economic benefits.
It can boost investment, expand manufacturing, support enterprise, raise the technology level and increase economic growth in the country.
In India, the defence industry in the government sector alone employs nearly 200,000 workers and thousands of engineers and scientists. They produce an output of nearly 7 billion dollars annually. It also supports a very large pool of small and medium enterprises.
Our defence industry in private sector is still small. But, it already employs thousands of people.
This is despite the fact that nearly 60% of our defence equipment continues to be imported.
And, we are spending tens of billions of dollars on acquisitions from abroad.
There are studies that show that even a 20 to 25% reduction in imports could directly create an additional 100,000 to 120,000 highly skilled jobs in India.
If we could raise the percentage of domestic procurement from 40% to 70% in the next five years, we would double the output in our defence industry.
Imagine the impact in terms of jobs created directly and in the related manufacturing and services sector!
Think of the spin off benefits on other sectors in terms of advanced materials and technologies!
That is why we are focusing on developing India`s defence industry with a sense of mission.
This is why it is at the heart of our Make in India programme.
We are reforming our defence procurement policies and procedures. There would be a clear preference for equipment manufactured in India.
Our procurement procedures will ensure simplicity, accountability and speedy decision making.
We have raised the permitted level of Foreign Direct Investment to 49%. This can go higher, if the project brings state-of-the art technology.
We have permitted investments up to 24% by Foreign Institutional Investments. And, there is no longer a need to have a single Indian investor with at least a 51% stake.
Industrial licensing requirements have been eliminated for a number of items. Where it is needed, the process has been simplified.
We are expanding the role of private sector, even for major platforms. Our goal is to provide a level playing field for all.
We speak in terms of national capacity, not public sector or private sector.
Offsets system is a crucial instrument to develop and upgrade our defence industry.
We have introduced significant reforms in our offsets policy. I am acutely aware that it still needs a lot of improvements. We will pursue them in consultation with domestic industry and our foreign partners.
I want our offsets policy not as a means to export low-end products, but to acquire state-of-the art technology and skills in core areas of priority.
Government`s support for research and development is essential for defence sector. And, it should also be accompanied by a degree of assurance on purchase.
We are introducing a scheme to provide up to 80% of funding from the Government for development of a prototype in India. And, we are also launching a Technology Development Fund.
For too long, our research and development has been confined to government laboratories. We must involve our scientists, soldiers, academia, industry and independent experts more closely in research and development.
Last month at the Army Day Reception, I had asked to meet our officers and soldiers, who had made the best innovations in our defence equipment. I was impressed with what I saw.
Finally, we have made our export policies clearer, simpler and predictable. But, we will also abide by the highest standards of export controls and international responsibility.
We will expand our exports, but we will ensure that our equipment and technology do not fall into the wrong hands.
India`s record in this area has been impeccable and it will remain so.
I am pleased with the positive impact of our policies.
Indian private corporations have responded with enthusiasm. There is new excitement in our small and medium scale sector. Many of the biggest global firms are forming strategic partnerships in India.
Some of them have already begun using India as part of their global supply chains or engineering services.
In September 2014 Dynamatic Technologies and its collaborator Boeing inaugurated a plant in India to manufacture critical parts for a Boeing helicopter that is sold globally. I understand that it was a day after Make in India was launched.
I am pleased to learn that the first set of parts is ready for shipment today.
But, we still need to do more.
We have to further reform our acquisition and approval processes. We must indicate a clear roadmap of our future needs.
This must take into account not only new technology trends, but also the nature of future challenges.
We must pay attention to developing supply chains, with emphasis on innovation.
We must bridge the gap between prototype development and quality of production.
We must develop a financing system suited to the special needs of this industry. It is a market where buyers are mainly governments, the capital investments are large and the risks are high.
We must ensure that our tax system does not discriminate against domestic manufacture in comparison to imports.
More broadly, our defence industry will succeed more if we can transform the manufacturing sector in India.
We need great infrastructure, sound business climate, clear investment policies, ease of doing business, stable and predictable tax regime, and easy access to inputs.
We need a national industry that produces advanced materials, the most sophisticated electronics and the best engineering products.
Over the last eight months, we have worked hard to create that environment for you.
Above all, we need a vast pool of highly skilled and qualified human resources for the defence industry.
Our aerospace industry alone would need about 200,000 people in another ten years.
We will set up special universities and skill development centres to cater to our defence industry, just as we have done in atomic energy and space.
I have especially invited the State Governments to come here with package of facilities to attract investments in defence manufacturing.
Distinguished guests,
This is a new era for the defence industry in India.
It will be no longer enough to buy equipment and simply assemble them here. We have been doing this in the past, without absorbing any technology or developing our own capabilities. In some areas, we are where we were three decades ago.
Frankly, our public sector needs to do much better than they are doing now. We have to exploit their huge assets and a vast potential. At the same time, we have to make them accountable.
We want to develop an industry is dynamic. It should constantly stay at the cutting edge of the global industry.
I am confident that India will emerge as a major global centre for defence industry.
We have the basic building blocks for it in India; and, a large nation requirement.
We will build an industry that will have room for everyone – public sector, private sector and foreign firms.
From sellers, foreign firms must turn into strategic partners.
We need their technology, skills, systems integration and manufacturing strength.
The nature of industry is such that imports will always be there.
In turn, they can use India as part of their global supply chain.
Defence budgets around the world are becoming tighter. India`s frugal but sophisticated manufacturing and engineering services sectors can help reduce costs.
India can also be a base for export to third countries, especially because of India`s growing defence partnerships in Asia and beyond.
A strong Indian defence industry will not only make India more secure. It will also make India more prosperous.
Aero India can be a catalyst in realizing our goals. That is why I am here today.
So, as we look at these wonderful aircraft and enjoy the amazing fly pasts, I also hope we can get some business done.
And, sow the seeds of successful new ventures and partnerships – to give our people new opportunities, to make our nations safer, and the world more stable and peaceful.
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
17 2 2015, India
Elevation of two saints in kerala
Cardinal George Alencherry Archbishop Andrews Thazhath Archbishop Kuriakose Bharanikulangara Archbishop Anil Couto Shri Arun Jaitley, Dr. Najma Heptulla, Shri P.J. Kurien, Deputy Chairman, Rajya Sabha Monseigneur Sebastian Vadakumpadan
PM Modi at National Celebration of Elevation to Sainthood of Elias Chavara n Mother Euphrasia (1)
I am delighted to participate in this function to celebrate the elevation to sainthood of two great saints of Kerala - Saint Kuriakose Elias Chavara and Saint Euphresia. The whole country is proud of their recognition. Their elevation was preceded by that of Saint Alphonsa, who also hailed from Kerala.
The life and deeds of Saint Chavara and Saint Euphresia are an inspiration not only to the Christian community, but to humanity as a whole. They are shining examples of dedication to God through selfless service for the betterment of mankind.
Saint Chavara was a man of prayer and also a social reformer. In an era when access to education was limited, he stressed that every church should have a school. He thus opened the doors of education to people from all sections of society.
Few outside Kerala know that he started a Sanskrit school, and also a printing press. His contribution towards women’s empowerment was also noteworthy.
Saint Euphrasia was a mystic who dedicated her life to prayer and devotion to God.
Both these saints dedicated their life to God through service of fellow beings. The ancient Indian saying: “आत्मानो मोक्षार्थम् जगत हितायाचा” – welfare of the world is the way to moksha (salvation) – explains their life.
Friends,
Spiritualism is rooted in India`s heritage. Indian saints and Greek sages had intellectual and spiritual exchanges thousands of years back. India’s openness to new ideas is manifest in the Rig Veda: आनो भद्राः क्रतवो यन्तु विश्वतः Let noble thoughts come to us from all sides. This philosophy has guided our intellectual discourse since time immemorial. Mother India gave birth to many religious and spiritual streams. Some of them have even travelled beyond Indian borders.
The tradition of welcoming, respecting and honouring all faiths is as old as India itself. As Swami Vivekananda said: We believe not only in universal toleration, but we accept all religions as true.
What Swami Vivekananda had said a century ago holds good and will, for ever, not only for this nation but also for this government or for that matter any government in India, run by any political party. This principle of equal respect and treatment for all faiths has been a part of India`s ethos for thousands of years. And that is how it became integral to the Constitution of India. Our Constitution did not evolve in a vacuum. It has roots in the ancient cultural traditions of India.
Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore had inspired us to dream of a land where the mind is without fear and the head is held high. It is that heaven of freedom we are duty bound to create and preserve. We believe that there is truth in every religion. एकम सत विप्र बहुधा वदन्ति
Friends,
Let me now come to the issue which is central and critical for peace and harmony in the contemporary world. The world is increasingly witnessing division and hostility on religious lines. This has become a matter of global concern. In this context the ancient Indian plea of mutual respect for all faiths is now beginning to manifest in global discourse.
This long felt need and urge for mutually respectful relations led to the interfaith conference on `Faith in Human Rights` at the Hague on tenth December, 2008. This was coincidentally also the 60th Anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights by the United Nations.
Religious leaders representing every major world religion - Christianity, Hinduism, Judaism, Baha`i Faith, Buddhism, Islam, Taoism and indigenous religions met, discussed and pledged to uphold the Universal Declaration and of freedom of religion or belief.
In their historic declaration, this is how they defined what constitutes freedom of faith and how it is to be safeguarded.
We consider the freedom to have, to retain, and to adopt, a religion or belief, is a personal choice of a citizen.
The world is at cross roads which, if not crossed properly, can throw us back to the dark days of bigotry, fanaticism and bloodshed. This harmonious convergence among religions could not be achieved even when the world entered the third millennium. And now it has been. This shows that the rest of the world too is evolving along the lines of ancient India.
Speaking for India, and for my government, I declare that my government stands by every word of the above declaration. My government will ensure that there is complete freedom of faith and that everyone has the undeniable right to retain or adopt the religion of his or her choice without coercion or undue influence. My government will not allow any religious group, belonging to the majority or the minority, to incite hatred against others, overtly or covertly. Mine will be a government that gives equal respect to all religions.
India is the land of Buddha and Gandhi. Equal respect for all religions must be in the DNA of every Indian. We cannot accept violence against any religion on any pretext and I strongly condemn such violence. My government will act strongly in this regard.
With this commitment, I appeal to all religious groups to act with restraint, mutual respect, and tolerance in the true spirit of this ancient nation which is manifest in our Constitution and is in line with the Hague Declaration.
Friends,
I have a vision of a Modern India. I have embarked on a huge mission to convert that vision into reality. My mantra is Development - सबका साथ, सबका विकास.
In simple terms it means food on every table, every child in school, a job for everybody and a house with toilet and electricity for every family. This will make India proud. We can achieve this through unity. Unity strengthens us. Division weakens us. I sincerely request all Indians, and all of you present here to support me in this huge task.
Let the elevation to sainthood of Saint Chavara and Saint Euphrasia, and their noble deeds inspire us:
-to maximize our inner strength -to use that strength for transforming society through selfless service -to fulfil our collective vision of a developed and modern India.
THANK YOU.
#DELIMITER#
16 2 2015, India
Visit of president of sri lanka
It is a great pleasure and privilege to welcome President Maithripala Sirisena and Mrs. Sirisena to India.
We are honoured that you have chosen India as your first overseas destination.
Let me congratulate you on behalf of the people of India for your historic victory. The election reflects the strength of democracy in Sri Lanka.
Your mandate carries the collective voice of Sri Lanka. It represents the aspirations of your people for a united, inclusive peaceful and prosperous nation.
India is Sri Lanka`s closest neighbour and friend. The goodwill and support of the people of India will always be with you.
The timeless links of history, religion and culture provide a solid foundation of our partnership.
We also share a broad range of interests - economic development for our countries; peace and prosperity in South Asia; maritime security in the region.
Indeed, I believe that our destinies are inter-linked. Our security and prosperity are indivisible.
President Sirisena and I had excellent discussions today on our bilateral relations and international issues.
President and I are committed to unlock the vast potential of our economic cooperation.
We are pleased to be Sri Lanka`s largest trading partner. I know that India enjoys a huge trade surplus. I expressed my support for a more balanced growth in trade in both directions.
I conveyed our readiness to promote greater flow of Indian investments and tourists into Sri Lanka.
We discussed expansion of cooperation in energy sector, both conventional and renewable.
Our Commerce Secretaries will meet soon to review our bilateral commercial relations.
We also intend to further improve air and sea connectivity between India and Sri Lanka.
The bilateral agreement on civil nuclear cooperation is yet another demonstration of our mutual trust. This is the first such agreement Sri Lanka has signed. It opens new avenues for cooperation, including in areas like agriculture and healthcare.
President and I also agreed to expand our defence and security cooperation. We welcomed the progress in our maritime security cooperation, including in the trilateral format with Maldives.
The Indian assisted projects for Internally Displaced Persons in Sri Lanka have made excellent progress. This includes the Housing Project, under which more than 27,000 houses have already been constructed. President and I expressed satisfaction with the progress.
I assured President Sirisena of India`s commitment to its development partnership with Sri Lanka. This will continue to cover a broad range of areas, including infrastructure. In this context, I am also pleased with the MoU on cooperation in agriculture.
President and I attach the highest importance to the fishermen`s issue. It affects livelihood on both sides. We agreed that there must be a constructive and humanitarian approach to the issue.
We will encourage the fishermen`s associations on both sides to meet again soon. They should find a solution that can be taken forward by both governments.
Like cricket, culture provides a strong bond between us. The Programme of Cultural Cooperation signed today will nurture those ties and promote contacts between people.
I am also delighted that Sri Lanka is now part of the Nalanda University Project.
It recalls a link forged 2300 years ago, by Prince Mahindra, known as Arhat Mahinda in Sri Lanka, and his sister Sanghamitra.They went to Sri Lanka as apostles of Buddhism.
Sri Lankan nationals visit the National Museum in New Delhi in large numbers to pay homage to the Kapilavastu relics. We have decided to reduce the fees for them.
I thanked the President for his invitation to me to visit Sri Lanka. I am eagerly looking forward to visiting his beautiful country in March.
I would like to once again welcome President Sirisena to India. We are at a moment of an unprecedented opportunity to take our bilateral relations to a new level. His visit today has set us firmly in that direction.
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
27 1 2015, India
Mann ki Baat with Barack obama
Today, Shri Barack Obama, President of the United States, joins us in a special programme of Mann Ki Baat. For the last few months, I have been sharing my "Mann Ki Baat" with you. But today, people from various parts of the country have asked questions.
But most of the questions are connected to politics, foreign policy, economic policy. However, some questions touch the heart. And I believe if we touch those questions today, we shall be able to reach out to the common man in different parts of the country. And therefore, the questions asked in press conferences, or discussed in meetings – instead of those – if we discuss what comes from the heart, and repeat it, hum it, we get a new energy. And therefore, in my opinion, those questions are more important. Some people wonder, what does "Barack" mean? I was searching for the meaning of Barack. In Swahili language, which is spoken in parts of Africa, Barack means, one who is blessed. I believe, along with a name, his family gave him a big gift.
African countries have lived by the ancient idea of ‘Ubuntu’, which alludes to the ‘oneness in humanity’. They say – “I am, because we are”. Despite the gap in centuries and borders, there is the same spirit of Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam, which speak of in India. This is the great shared heritage of humanity. This unites us. When we discuss Mahatma Gandhi, we remember Henry Thoreau, from whom Mahatma Gandhi learnt disobedience. When we talk about Martin Luther King or Obama, we hear from their lips, respect for Mahatma Gandhi. These are the things that unite the world.
Today, Barack Obama is with us. I will first request him to share his thoughts. Then, I and Barack will both answer the questions that have been addressed to us.
It is true that when I first went to America, I was not lucky enough to visit the White House. There is an iron fence far from the White House. We stood outside the fence and took a photograph. White House is visible in the background. Now that I have become Prime Minister, that photo too has become popular. But at that time, I had never thought that sometime in my life, I would get a chance to visit the White House. But when I visited the White House, one thing touched my heart. I can never forget that. Barack gave me a book, a book that he had located after considerable effort. That book had become famous in 1894. Swami Vivekananda, the inspiration of my life, had gone to Chicago to participate in the World Religions Conference. And this book was a compilation of the speeches delivered at the World Religions Conference. That touched my heart. And not just this. He turned the pages of the book, and showed me what was written there. He had gone through the entire book! And he told me with pride, I come from the Chicago where Swami Vivekananda had come. These words touched my heart a lot. And I will treasure this throughout my life. So once, standing far from the White House and taking a photo, and then, to visit the White House, and to receive a book on someone whom I respect. You can imagine, how it would have touched my heart.
No. I never imagined it. Because, as Barack said, I come from a very ordinary family. But for a long time, I have been telling everyone, never dream of becoming something. If you wish to dream, dream of doing something. When we do something, we get satisfaction, and also get inspiration to do something new. If we only dream of becoming something, and cannot fulfil the dream, then we only get disappointed. And therefore, I never dreamt of becoming something. Even today, I have no dream of becoming something. But I do dream of doing something. Serving Mother India, serving 125 crore Indians, there can be no greater dream than this. That is what I have to do.
When I was young, I used to see Kennedy's pictures in Indian newspapers. His personality was very impressive. But your question is, who has inspired me. I liked reading as a child. And I got an opportunity to read the biography of Benjamin Franklin. He lived in the eighteenth century. And he was not an American President. But his biography is so inspiring – how a person can intelligently try to change his life.
If we feel excessively sleepy, how can we reduce that?
If we feel like eating too much, how can we work towards eating less?
If people get upset with you that cannot meet them, because of the pressure of work, then how to solve this problem?
He has addressed such issues in his biography. And I tell everyone, we should read Benjamin Franklin's biography. Even today, it inspires me. And Benjamin Franklin had a multi-dimensional personality. He was a politician, he was a political scientist, he was a social worker, he was a diplomat. And he came from an ordinary family. He could not even complete his education. But till today, his thoughts have an impact on American life. I find his life truly inspiring. And I tell you too, if you read his biography, you will find ways to transform your life too. And he has talked about simple things. So I feel you will be inspired as much as I have been.
Indeed Barack has spoken words from the heart (Mann Ki Baat). Whatever position we may hold, we are human too. Simple things can inspire us. I also wish to narrate an experience. For many years, I was like an ascetic. I got food at other people's homes. Whoever invited me, used to feed me as well. Once a family invited me over for a meal, repeatedly. I would not go, because I felt they are too poor, and if I go to eat at their place, I will become a burden on them. But eventually, I had to bow to their request and love. And I went to eat a meal at their home. It was a small hut, where we sat down to eat. They offered me roti made of bajra (millet), and mik. Their young child was looking at the milk. I felt, the child has never even seen milk. So I gave that small bowl of milk to the child. And he drank it within seconds. His family members were angry with him. And I felt that perhaps that child has never had any milk, apart from his mother's milk. And maybe, they had bought milk so that I could have a good meal. This incident inspired me a lot. A poor person living in a hut could think so much about my well-being. So I should devote my life to their service. So these are the things that serve as inspiration. And Barack has also spoken about what can touch the heart.
I am thankful to Barack, he has given so much time. And I am thankful to my countrymen for listening to Mann Ki Baat. I know radio reaches every home and every lane of India. And this Mann Ki Baat, this special Mann Ki Baat will echo forever.
I have an idea. I share it with you. There should be an e-book made of the talk between Barack and me today. I hope the organizers of Mann Ki Baat will release this e-book. And to you all, who have listened to Mann Ki Baat, I also say, do participate in this. And the best hundred thoughts that emerge out of this, will also be added to this e-book. And I want you to write to us on Twitter, on Facebook, or online, using the hashtag #YesWeCan.
• Eliminate Poverty - #YesWeCan • Quality Healthcare to All - #YesWeCan • Youth empowered with Education - #YesWeCan • Jobs for All - #YesWeCan • End to Terrorism - #YesWeCan • Global Peace and Progress - #YesWeCan
I want you to send your thoughts, experiences and feelings after listening to Mann Ki Baat. From them, we will select the best hundred, and we will add them to the book containing the talk that Barack and I have had. And I believe, this will truly become, the Mann Ki Baat of us all.
Once again, a big thank you to Barack. And to all of you. Barack's visit to India on this pious occasion of 26th January, is a matter of pride for me and for the country.
Thank you very much.
#DELIMITER#
16 1 2015, India
economic times global business summit
My colleague Shri Arun Jaitley ji
Shri Vineet Jain
Friends from India and abroad,
I am happy to be here today, to address the Global Business Summit. This is a good platform, for bringing together economists and industry leaders. I compliment The Economic Times for organising this event.
Over the next two days, you will debate growth and inflation, manufacturing and infrastructure, missed chances and unlimited possibilities. You will see India as a country of opportunities, unmatched across the world. I assure you that your inputs shall receive my government’s highest attention.
Friends,
मकर संक्रांति(
Makar Sankranti) was celebrated on 14 January. It is an important festival. It is the beginning of उत्तरायण
(Uttarayan), which is considered to be a पुण्यकाल
(Punya kaal). The लोहड़ी (
Lohri) festival also coincides with it. On this day, the Sun begins its journey North. This marks the transition from winter to spring.
The New Age India has also begun its transition; from a winter of subdued achievements lasting 3 to 4 years, to a new spring that beckons.
The country had fallen into deep despair, with two back-to-back years of below 4% growth, and governance at rock bottom. A series of scams, from telecom to coal had paralysed the economy. We deviated from the dream of India as a land of opportunity. No longer can we afford the flight of capital and labour, for lack of opportunity.
We have to repair the damage that has happened. Restoring growth momentum will be an uphill task. It will take hard work, sustained commitment and strong administrative action. But we can overcome the mood of despair. And we must. It is in this context that all the steps we have taken must be seen.
Friends,
Destiny has favoured me to serve this great nation. Mahatma Gandhi said that we should not rest until we “
wipe every tear from every eye”. Elimination of poverty is fundamental to me. This is at the core of my understanding of cohesive growth. To translate this vision into the reality of a New Age India, we must be clear about our economic goals and objectives.
The government must nurture an eco-system:
where the economy is primed for growth; and
o  growth promotes all-round development;
where development is employment-generating; and
o  employment is enabled by skills;
where skills are synced with production; and
o  production is benchmarked to quality;
where quality meets global standards; and
o  meeting global standards drives prosperity
Most importantly, this prosperity is for the welfare of all.
That is my concept of economic good governance and all round development. It is up to us to create conditions for the people of India to blossom and create this New Age India.
Friends,
Let me outline what we are doing to usher in this new spring. My government is moving fast in designing policies and laws to promote growth. This is where I seek everybody’s cooperation.
First, we are committed to achieving the fiscal deficit target announced in the budget. We have worked systematically in this direction.
Many of you practise Kaizen in your companies. Reducing wastage means cutting excess and preventing misuse. This requires self-discipline.
That is why we have the Expenditure Management Commission to suggest cuts in wasteful expenditure. This way, we will make the Rupee more productive, and deliver maximum bang for the buck.
Second, the petroleum sector has seen major reforms.
Diesel prices have been deregulated. This has opened up space for private players to enter into petroleum retail.
Gas prices have been linked to international prices. This will bring a new wave of investment. It will increase supplies. It will resolve problems in the key power sector.
Today, India’s cooking gas subsidy is the world’s largest Cash Transfer Programme. Over 80 million households receive subsidy directly as cash into their bank accounts. This is one-third of all households in this country. This will completely eliminate leakage.
Building on this, we plan to introduce direct cash transfers in other benefit schemes.
Third, inflation has been controlled through firm measures.
While falling oil prices helped, even non-oil inflation is at a very low level. Food inflation has come down from over 15% a year ago to 3.1% last month. The fall has been sharp since May 2014.
This set the stage for RBI to reduce interest rates, and push growth in a stable manner.
Fourth, the consensus we arrived with States for amending the Constitution to implement GST is a major breakthrough.
GST has been pending for over a decade. This alone has the potential to make India competitive and attractive for investment.
Fifth, the poor have been included in the financial system.
In a short span of 4 months, over 100 million new bank accounts have been opened under the Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana. For a country of our size, this was an immense challenge. But with will, determination and the full support of every banker, we are today a nearly 100% banked country. Soon, all accounts will be linked with Aadhaar. Banking habits will become common across the country.
This now opens immense possibilities for the future. People’s savings will rise. They will invest in new financial instruments. 1.2 billion people can hope for pensions and insurance. As the nation progresses, these bank accounts will drive demand and growth.
We have always debated about social unity, national unity and so on. But we have never debated about financial unity. About bringing everyone into the financial system. This is one cause which both capitalists and socialists agree on. What, my friends, can be a bigger reform?
Sixth, the energy sector has been reformed.
Coal blocks are now allocated transparently through auctions.
Mining laws have been changed to facilitate efficient mining.
Similar reforms are on the way in the 
Power sector. We have revived long pending projects in Nepal and Bhutan, with the cooperation of their governments. Steps are being taken to deliver 24 x 7 Power for All, using every possible source, including renewable energy.
Seventh, India is being made an attractive destination for investment.
FDI caps have been raised in Insurance and Real estate.
FDI and private investment are being promoted in Defense and Railways.
The Land Acquisition Act has been amended to smoothen the process and speed up matters. This will give a thrust to infrastructure and manufacturing, while protecting the compensation to farmers.
Eighth, infrastructure is being given a boost.
Greater investment is planned in railways and roads. New approaches and instruments are being put in place to unlock their potential.
Ninth, transparency and efficiency in governance, and institutional reforms are essential elements for rapid growth. These, along with a positive regulatory framework, tax stability, and ease of doing business, are being pushed ahead at top speed.
For instance, I recently assured 
Public Sector Banks they will have total autonomy in taking business decisions, without any interference from Government on loans and their operations.
We need to use 
technology to deliver good governance. Whether it is a simple one like biometric-based attendance, which has improved office attendance and work culture. Or a cutting edge one, like space technology in mapping and planning.
I intend to launch a massive National Program for PDS Computerisation. The entire PDS supply chain, from the FCI godown to the ration shop and consumer will be computerised. Technology will drive welfare and efficient food delivery.
A major institutional reform is the move away from merely planning, to transforming India. The setting up of the National Institution for Transforming India, 
NITI Aayog, is a step in this direction. This will take the country forward on the path of cooperative federalism, with a competitive zeal. The NITI Aayog is our Mantra for creating trust and partnership between the Centre and States.
This list can be endless. I can go on for days, but I do not think we have the time.
However, I have given you a sense of the immense activity we are engaged in. We have done a lot so far and more will be done in future.
Friends,
Reforms are not an end in itself. Reforms must have a concrete objective. The objective must be to improve the welfare of the people. Approaches may be many. But the goal is one.
Reforms may not be apparent to one and all at first sight. But small acts can drive reforms. What appears minor can actually be vital and fundamental.
Further, there is no contradiction between doing big tickets items and doing small things.
One approach is to have new policies, programmes, large projects and path breaking changes. Another approach is to focus on the small things that matter, create a people’s movement and generate mass momentum, which then drives development. We need to follow both paths.
Let me explain this a bit. Generating 20,000 MW of power attracts a lot of attention. That is important.
At the same time, 20,000 MW of power can be saved through a people’s movement for energy efficiency.
The end result is similar. The second is more difficult but is as important as the first. In the same way, improving a thousand primary schools is as important as opening a new university.
The new AIIMS we are setting up will improve public health in the same way as our promise of Health Assurance. To me, Health Assurance is not a scheme. It is about ensuring that every Rupee spent on health is well spent; that every citizen has access to proper healthcare.
Similarly, when we do Swachh Bharat, it has multiple impacts. It is not just a fad or a slogan. It changes people’s mindsets. It changes our lifestyle. Swachhata becomes a habit. Waste management generates economic activity. It can create lakhs of Swachhata entrepreneurs. The nation gets identified with cleanliness. And of course, it has a huge impact on health. After all, diarrhoea and other diseases cannot be defeated without Swachhata!
The mantra of independence was सत्याग्रह
(Satyagraha). And the warriors were सत्या-ग्रही
(Satyagrahis). The mantra of New Age India must be स्वच्छता-ग्रह
(Swachhagraha). And the warriors will be स्वच्छता-ग्रही
(Swachhagrahis).
Take the case of Tourism. It is an untapped economic activity. But tapping it requires a Swachh Bharat. It needs improvement in infrastructure and telecom connectivity. It requires better education and skill development. Therefore, a simple goal can generate reforms in multiple sectors.
People must understand the Clean Ganga program, as an economic activity also. The Gangetic plains account for 40% of our population. They have over one hundred towns, and thousands of villages. Improving Ganga will develop new infrastructure. It will promote tourism. It will create a modern economy helping millions of people. In addition, it preserves the environment!
Railways is another example. There are thousands of railway stations in the country where not more than 1 or 2 trains stop in a day. These facilities, created at a cost, remain unused for most of the day. These stations can become growth points for the nearby villages. They can be used for skill development.
Small indeed, is beautiful.
In agriculture too, our main goal is to raise productivity. This will require using technology, increasing soil fertility, producing more crop per drop, and bringing the latest from lab to land. Cost of cultivation will go down as efficiency rises. This will make agriculture viable.
On the output side, the entire value chain in agriculture will be addressed through better storage, transport and food processing linkages. We will link farmers to global markets. We will give the world the 
Taste of India.
Friends,
I have often called for Minimum Government Maximum Governance. This is not a slogan. This is an important principle to transform India.
सरकारी तंत्र की दो समस्याएं हैं - वे जटिल भी हैं और शिथिल भी। 
Government systems suffer from two weaknesses. They are complex. And they are slow.
In life, people go on a चारधामयात्रा(
chaar dham yatra) to get मोक्ष (
moksha). In government, a file has to go to छत्तीसधाम
(chattees dham), and yet not get मोक्ष
(moksha)!
We need to change this. Our systems need to bemade sharp, effective, fast and flexible. This requires simplification of processes and having trust in citizens. This needs a Policy Driven State.
What is Maximum Governance, Minimum Government? It means government has no business to be in business. There are many parts of the economy where the private sector will do better and deliver better. In 20 years of liberalisation, we have not changed a command and control mindset. We think it is okay for government to meddle in the working of firms. This must change. But this is not a call for anarchy.
First, we need to focus government upon the things that are required of the State. Second, we need to achieve competence in government so that the State delivers on the things it sets out to do.
Why do we need the State? There are 5 main components:
The first is public goods such as defence, police, and judiciary.
The second is externalities which hurt others, such as pollution. For this, we need a regulatory system.
The third is market power; where monopolies need controls
The fourth is information gaps; where you need someone to ensure that medicines are genuine and so on.
Last, we need a well designed welfare and subsidy mechanism to ensure that the bottom of society is protected from deprivation. This specially includes education and healthcare.
These are five places where we require government.
In the five areas where we need government, we require competent, efficient and non-corrupt arms of government. We in government, must constantly ask the question: How much money am I spending, and what outcomes am I getting in return? For this, government agencies have to be improved to become competent. This requires rewriting some laws. Laws are the DNA of government. They must evolve with time.
India is a 2 trillion dollar economy today. Can we not dream of an India with a 20 trillion dollar economy?
Should we not create the environment for this to happen? We are preparing the ground for it. This is hard work. Quick and easy reforms will not be enough for creating a fast growing economy. That is our challenge and that is what we aim to do.
Digital India and Skill India are attempts in this direction.
Digital India will reform government systems, eliminate waste, increase access and empower citizens. It will drive the next wave of growth, which will be knowledge-driven. Broadband in every village, with a wide range of online services, will transform India in a manner we cannot foresee.
Skill India will harness the demographic dividend which everyone talks of.
Friends,
Improvement in governance is a continuous process. We are making changes wherever acts, rules and procedures are not in tune with needs. We are cutting down on multiple clearances that choke investment. Our complex tax system is crying for reform, which we have initiated. I believe in speed. I will push through change at a fast pace. You will appreciate this in times to come.
At the same time, we need to take care of the poor, deprived and left behind sections of society.
I believe that subsidies are needed for them. What we need is a well targeted system of subsidy delivery. We need to cut subsidy leakages, not subsidies themselves.
Wastage, as I said earlier, must be removed in subsidies. The target group should be clearly identified and the subsidies should be well delivered. The ultimate objective of subsidies should be to empower the poor, to break the cycle of poverty, and become foot-soldiers in our war on poverty.
At this point, I would also say that development has to result in jobs. Reforms, economic growth, progress – all are empty words if they do not translate into jobs.
What we need is not just more production, but mass production and production by masses.
Friends,
Economic development cannot take a nation forward on its own.
Development has many dimensions. While on one hand we need higher incomes, we also need a society which is cohesive. Which balances the stress and strain of a modern economy.
History is witness to the rise and fall of nations. Even now, many countries have become rich in an economic sense, but are poor in a social sense. Their family systems, value systems, social networks and other elements which hold a society together have broken.
We should not go down that path. We need a society and economy which complement each other. That is the only way for a nation to go forward.
Further, development seems to have become the agenda only of government. It is seen as a scheme. That should not be the case.
Development should be everyone's agenda. It should be a people's movement.
Friends, like the rest of the World, we are concerned about two dangers - Terrorism and Climate change. Together, we will find a way to face these.
Today, everyone is looking towards Asia for inspiration and growth. And within Asia, India is important. Not just for its size, but for its democracy, and its values. India’s core philosophy is सर्व मंगल मांगल्यम्
(Sarva Mangala Maangalyam) and सर्व भवन्तु सुखिनः
(Sarve Bhavantu Sukhinah). This is a call for global welfare, global cooperation and balanced living.
India can be a role model of growth and cohesiveness for the rest of the world.
For this, we need a workforce and economy which meet global needs and expectations.
We need to quickly improve social indicators. India should no longer be bracketed with the least developed. We can do this.
Swami Vivekananda had said “
Arise, awake, do not stop until the goal has been attained”.
This should inspire us all to achieve the vision of a New Age India.
Together, we can!
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
11 1 2015, India
Vibrant Gujarat Summit
Honourable Prime Minister of Bhutan, Honourable Prime Minister of Macedonia, Secretary of State John Kerry, UN Secretary General Ban Ki Moon, World Bank President Jim Yong Kim,
Honourable Ministers and dignitaries from Australia, Canada, Denmark, Fiji, Iran, Israel, Japan, Mauritius, the Netherlands, Poland, Romania, Russia, Singapore, UAE and United Kingdom 
Excellencies, Ladies & Gentlemen!
On behalf of the people of India and on my personal behalf, I welcome you all to this Summit.  In January, 2013,  while concluding the sixth Summit, I had extended an invitation for today’s event.  Your response has been outstanding. I am glad to be here to welcome you. On this occasion, I express my gratitude to the old partners of this event - both countries and organisations. These include Japan and Canada. Without their support, this event could not have come this far.
I also welcome warmly and thank new partners like USA, UK, Netherlands, Australia, Singapore and South Africa for joining this event.
I particularly thank the Secretary General of the United Nations and the President of the World Bank  for their presence. It shows their commitment towards progress and prosperity in emerging economies.
Your partnership has enhanced  the enterprising spirit of 60 million Gujaratis  It has boosted the morale of 1.2 billion Indians. This event is perhaps the biggest gathering on earth where, a budding entrepreneur has the opportunity to see  the President of the World Bank. And where a young farmer, dreaming to set up a food processing unit,  can listen to the views of the UN Secretary General  on issues like food security.  That is why,  during one of the previous events,  I had called it ‘Davos in Action’. 
Friends! India has always believed that the whole world is one family  (Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam).  Few have seen this in practice  I am informed that more than hundred countries  are participating in this event.
We are here as a family  not only in terms of space,  but also because we recognise that:  
Someone’s dream is dependent on someone’s direction;
Someone’s success is related to someone’s support;
Someone’s curiosity is linked to someone’s care;
This is what a family does. The ultimate objective is welfare of all  Loka Samastah Sukhinau Bhavantu. 
I am sure all of us,  from the Secretary General of UN  to the President of the World Bank, from leaders of the strongest economies  to delegations of small countries,  from CEOs of Fortune 500 companies  to start-up entrepreneurs,  all want the planet earth to become a better place to live.
Thus,  our meeting here is not just -
A meeting of hands  but also of hearts;
It is not only a meeting of ideas,  but also of aspirations
 As a host to this family gathering, As a curator of thousands of dreams floating here,
 I welcome you all once again  
 I hope your stay here is comfortable. I trust you will enjoy our hospitality. This is the time of Kite Festival in Gujarat. This festival  gives us the message of high spirits.  Do participate in it.
 Friends! After becoming Prime Minister, I have travelled  to the remotest parts of India  and also to various parts of the world.  I have been to the UN, BRICS, ASEAN, East Asian Summit, G-20 and SAARC summits. Some common worries have been expressed everywhere. The biggest concern is about the global economy. We all have to find ways  for its stability and recovery. We also have to work  for sustainable and inclusive growth.
 We,  in India,  believe that problems present us  with opportunities to become stronger,  disciplined and innovative.
 My Government is trying to generate confidence.  We have prepared a team  to secure a robust future.  We believe that  changes start with a change in mindset.
 Friends! It is a matter of great pride that today,  there is tremendous interest in India. Countries are coming forward to work with us. This has,  of course,  generated expectations from us.
 India’s present  as well as its rich past  is being recognised I thank the UN Secretary General  for giving a formal international stature to Yoga. A record number of 177 countries supported the Indian proposal. Yoga is both a science  and an art  for improving human life. In today’s world,  it teaches us to remain stable  even in adverse situations.
 Friends,  the 2009 edition of this event  created vibrancy when the state of the global economy was depressing. The summits of 2011 and 2013  succeeded in strengthening investor confidence.
 It is only because of persistence with positivity  that this event of Gujarat Government  has become an event for the entire country.  This platform has been enlarged  so that other states too  can take advantage.  Today,  many other states have adopted this approach  The Government of India is committed to support  such initiatives by any state government.
 Friends!  We will have to change the way we have been approaching problems.  Recession is often seen  just in the context of business and Industry.
 Have we ever thought of recession as being the result of low per capita income in countries  where a majority of the global population lives?
 Have we ever thought of its solution  in terms of enhancing  the common man’s employability, income and purchasing power?  This is the biggest task at hand in India.  Mahatma Gandhi rightly talked about the last man.  And Gandhiji’s message  can show us the way  It is therefore appropriate that this summit is taking place  in Mahatma Mandir.
 To me,  the best outcome of this event  should be inclusiveness and involvement of communities  needing care and development.
 Thus, this event stands for-
 Inclusiveness of small with big;
Inclusiveness of poor with rich;
Inclusiveness of gut feelings with mature thoughts
I assure this global platform  that India wants to work with the global leadership. Be they issues of poverty or ecology. We want to contribute to welfare of the global community. We are aware that  with one sixth of the world’s population,  our activities will have a global impact.  We are ready to learn  and make this impact positive.
However,  India has to be seen from a different angle  It is not just a country of today. It is also an old civilisation. It is not just a country of a few cities. It is a country of thousands of towns and several hundred thousand villages. It is a country of diverse communities  Therefore,  India has its own solutions  for many pressing problems.
Our philosophy is a philosophy of conservation;
Our culture teaches us nurturing of nature;
Our way of life is that of harnessing
Such thoughts and practices  have existed in India for centuries.  Thus,  whatever we will do,  it will be aligned with our culture,  ethos  and beliefs.  Because, we know,  this is what will work in India.
Friends!  Our last national elections  marked a turning point in Indian democracy. They indicated the high aspirations of our people. This was amply reflected in the record voter participation and a clear verdict in favour of one political party  after a gap of 30 years.
My government is committed to changing and improving the economic and social condition of India  including the quality of life.
In a short span of seven months,  we have been able to change  the atmosphere of despair and uncertainty. Since the first day, my government is actively working to revive the economy. My government is committed  to create a policy environment  that is predictable, transparent and fair.
Friends!  We are on the path of transformation. To start this process,  we are making efforts  to change the work culture. We have to strengthen our institutions  and systems of delivery. To drive this change forcefully, we have recently re-constituted our Planning Commission  Now, it is known as NITI Ayog.
We want to promote  co-operative federalism in the country  At the same time, we want a competitive element among the states  to create and attract whatever is needed there.  I call this new form of federalism  Co-operative and Competitive Federalism.
You may be aware that  our economic growth had slowed down  during the last few years  Now,  my Government is putting all efforts  to ensure faster and yet inclusive growth. The initial results are encouraging.
On the economic front,  during the first two quarters,  we registered a growth rate  which was one percent higher than the previous year.  The IMF has observed that  India will be the 2nd fastest growing economy in the coming years.
According to the latest forecast of the OECD,  India would be the only country among world's top economies  which would increase its pace of growth this year  HSBC's latest report has identified India  as the world's largest growing exporter,  which is set to move  from being the fourteenth  to the fifth largest exporter in the world  by 2030.
On the political front also,  people of various states have supported us  in the recent Assembly elections.
This gives us the confidence that  we are moving in right direction.  Let me tell you a little about  what we are doing  and where we want to reach.
Friends! We are not merely making commitments and announcements.  We are also backing them up  with concrete action  at the level of policy and practice. For example,  I announced a Financial Inclusion programme. In four months,  we have opened  more than 100 million bank accounts.
We are planning to build smart cities  equipped with world-class amenities. For this purpose, we have further liberalized the FDI policy in construction sector.
I announced that a modern rail system including high speed rails  will be set up  Immediately, we opened up railways for 100% FDI. I announced that defence production in the country would be encouraged. The next step was to open the defence sector  for FDI up to 49%.  We have taken similar steps in many other areas. These include bringing 49% FDI in insurance.  It also includes  liberalization of FDI norms for manufacturing of medical devices.
Simultaneously, on the administrative front, we are actively working to provide policy driven governance. We have taken far reaching decisions  to ensure supply of key natural resources. This includes coal, iron ore and other minerals. We have also amended legal provisions  to facilitate availability of land. This has been done  to enable development in remote areas  while ensuring better returns to the farming community.
We are trying to complete  the circle of economic reforms speedily.  We are also keen to see that  our policies are predictable. We are clear that our tax regime should be stable. In the last few months,  we have taken several decisions in this direction.
We have put focus  on building Infrastructure through public and private Investments. This will include  national roads,  national grids of gas, electricity and water. It also includes rural infrastructure,  24x7 electric supply,  farm irrigation  and cleaning of rivers.
In order to execute the infrastructure plan,  a fast track PPP mechanism is being put in place.
We are undertaking  the Sagarmala project  to ensure port led development.  Existing ports are being modernized.   New world class ports will be developed  along India's coast.  Ports will be better connected to the hinterland  through road and rail  Inland and coastal waterways  will be developed  as major transport routes.  Low cost airports are being planned  to improve regional connectivity,  especially to tier-two towns  and places of economic and tourist importance.
We are also keen  to move towards the next generation infrastructure   Just as we need highways, we need I-ways too  Under the Digital India Initiative, IT will be used to drive Government processes  to improve service delivery and program implementation, and also to provide broadband connectivity to villages.
To upgrade manufacturing Infrastructure,  we are setting up world-class investment and industrial regions  along the dedicated freight corridors and industrial corridors Government of India is working towards single window clearance  at the Federal and State levels.
Four months back, we launched Make In India initiative  to encourage the growth of manufacturing in the country. We are working hard  to make India a global manufacturing hub. We are promoting,  in particular,  labour intensive manufacturing.
I have launched these initiatives  in a campaign mode  so that they force us in the Government to make faster corrections. They challenge us to do away with the red tape  and become pro-active  With this purpose, our applications and processes are being aggressively put online.
Ease of doing business in India  is a prime concern for you and us.  I assure you that  we are working very seriously on these issues  We want to make them:
Not only easier than earlier;
Not only easier than the rest;
But, we want to make them the easiest
Friends!  Many of you might be interested to know -  Why India?  India has three things to its credit -  Democracy,  Demography  and Demand.  This is what you are looking for.
And I am sure,  you will not find all of them together  at any other destination  India offers you the potential of low cost manufacturing.  India has low cost and high quality manpower 65% of our population  is below 35 years of age. We are trying to further harness these strengths  through better management and good governance.
In the recently launched Mars Orbiter Mission, everything was made indigenously  In fact,  most mission components were made  in very small factories.
Friends!  We have large number of hands to work. And, we have even larger number of dreams  to be realised. Therefore,  employment opportunities are being enhanced  by promoting manufacturing,  agro-based industries,  tourism as well as services  We have undertaken labour reforms  to encourage enterprise  and to create a bigger job market  for our youth.
I have always said that  development process should benefit  the common man  as well as the business sector.
Therefore,  my Government has established  a new Ministry for skill development  to enhance our human resource potential. For this,  we are placing equal emphasis on knowledge, technology,  innovation  and research and development.  This includes the use of ICT  for improving governance and resource management. I understand this because. I use modern tools of communication myself.
Friends!  Today,  India is a land of opportunities. We have to build  fast track roads and railways. We have to energise homes and factories  on a continuous basis. We have to build infrastructure for cities  where almost half of our population lives. We have to take the taste of modern amenities to every village. We have to propel our growth  through value addition in our natural resources  and agri-produce. We have to provide services to our people  which are of global standards.  At the same time,  the whole world is looking for certain services. If our human resource can be equipped with skills and technology, we may serve the world in many areas.
Thus,  there are immense possibilities  for global investors in India  The process of development we are taking up  is not incremental  We are planning to take a quantum leap. It is not limited to one sector  or region, it is truly unlimited. And we want to do things  in a cleaner and greener way. We are open to ideas, investments  and innovations.
Friends!
We have made commitments to our people
We have made commitments to ourselves
We have made commitments for India’s great future
We have to write our new destiny
And we have to write it in a very short time
We know that to do this,  we need an enabling policy framework  We are working constantly to improve it further. However,  I can say with confidence  that even today,  the strength of Indian democracy  and independence of our judicial system provide a level playing field  for long lasting business.
 I would conclude  by saying that-
 We are dreaming big;
And our dreams are numerous;
Our dreams can become  the seeds of your growth;
Our aspirations can propel your ambitions
Friends!  on behalf of the Government,  let me give an assurance  We assure you that  we will be available to hold your hands  whenever you need us. You will find us standing with you in your journey  If you walk one step; we will walk two steps for you.
At the end,  I urge you to see  and realise  for yourself that -
India is changing fast;
India is growing fast ;
India is moving faster than expected;
India is learning even faster;
India is ready than ever before
Let us join hands! Let us work together  for progress,  prosperity and peace
Thank you
#DELIMITER#
14 12 2014, India
Mann ki baat
My Dear Fellow Countrymen,
Today I have this great opportunity of interacting with you again. You must be wondering why a Prime Minister should be interacting the way I am doing it. Well, first and foremost, I am a less of your Prime Minister and more of a Pradhan Sewak (serving the people). Since childhood I have been hearing that by sharing, our intensity of pain become less while the intensity of our joys grow manifold. Well I think, this is the guiding thought behind Mann ki Baat. It is an opportunity for me to sometimes share my concern and sometimes my joy. Sharing my deepest concerns with you makes me feel light hearted and sharing my joy just doubles my happiness.
Last time, I mentioned my concern about the youth of the country. It is not because you chose me as the Prime Minister but because I feel concerned as an individual. Sons and daughters of many families are caught in the trap of drugs. It just does not destroy the person involved, but his entire family, the society and the Nation at large. Drug is such a grave menace which destroys the most powerful individuals.
While serving as the Chief Minister of Gujarat, my officers with good records would often come to ask for leave. Initially they would hesitate to spell out the reasons, however on insisting they revealed that their child had fallen into the drug trap and they now need to spend time with their kids and rehabilitate them. I could see the bravest of my officers struggling to control their tears. I met suffering mothers too. In Punjab I had the chance to meet some mothers who were very angry and yet concerned about their children who had fallen into the trap of drugs.
We have to work together as a society to tackle this menace. I understand that the youth who fall into this drug trap are often blamed. We blame these youth as being careless and irresponsible. We perceive that the victims are bad but the fact is that the drugs are bad. The youth are not wrong; it is this addiction which is wrong. Let us not blame and wrong our kids. Let us get rid of  this habit of addiction and not victimize our kids. Blaming the kids would push them further into addiction. This is in fact a psycho-socio-medical issue and let us treat it as such a problem. This menace needs to be handled carefully as its solution is not limited to medical intervention only.  The individual concerned, his family, friends, the society, the government and the legal system all have to work in tandem to tackle this menace. Each one of us have to contribute to get rid of this menace..
A few days ago, I had organized a DGP level conference in Assam. I expressed my concern over this issue and my displeasure at the non-serious attitude of the people concerned. I have asked the police department to seriously discuss this issue and come out with relevant solutions. I have suggested the department to launch a toll free helpline. The families often feel ashamed to come out in open about the addiction problem of their children. They have no one to confide in. Parents from any part, any corner of the country can freely approach the police if their children have fallen a victim to addiction. The department has taken this suggestion seriously and working towards its fulfillment.
The drug menace brings about the Three D’s. These Three D’s are not the ones related to entertainment but I am talking about the Three D’s related to the three vices.
First D is Darkness, the second D is Destruction and the third D is Devastation.
Drugs lead a person to a blind path of destruction. There is nothing left in its trail but devastation. This is a topic of great concern and demands total attention.
I had mentioned this topic in my last address in Mann ki Baat. We received more than 7000 letters on our Akashvani address. Some letters were received in the government offices. We received responses on government portal, Mygov.in, online and through e-mails. Lakhs of comments were received on twitter and facebook. Hence, a deep rooted concern in the society’s psyche has found a voice.
I am especially thankful to the media of our country for carrying this concern forward. Many channels conducted hour long programs. These programs were not just meant to criticize the government. They were forums for open discussion, a concern and an effort to come out with workable solutions. These initiatives created background for healthy discussions. The government was also sensitized to its responsibilities in this direction. The government can no longer remain neutral to these concerns.
There is a question I want to ask these youth caught in the drug trap. I want to ask these youth that when for three or four hours they are in a state of intoxication, they might be feeling free of all concerns, free of all tensions and  in a different world altogether. But have you ever lent a thought to the fact that when you buy drugs where does this money go to? Have you ever thought about it? Just make a guess. What if this drug money goes to the terrorists? What if this money is spent by the terrorists to procure weapons? And with this weapon the very same terrorist might be pumping bullets in the heart of my soldiers. The soldier of my country gets martyred. Have you ever thought about our soldiers- a soldier who is so dear to his mother, the treasured son of Mother India, the brave son of the soil is hit by a bullet probably funded by the money spent on purchasing drugs. I know and firmly believe that you too love your motherland and have tremendous respect for our soldiers. Then how can you support a habit which funds drug mafia and the terrorists.
Some people feel that when a person is in despair, faces failures and when he is directionless, he is an easy prey to drugs. But I feel that people who lack ambition, do not have any set goals and targets, who have a deep vacuum in their lives, are the ones where drugs will have an easy access. If you want to avoid drugs and save your children from this menace then foster ambition in them, give them dreams to pursue and make them individuals with a desire to achieve something in life. Then you will see that they will not be easily distracted. Their aim then will be to achieve something in life.
Have you ever followed a sportsman’s life?  A sportsman is motivated forever. In the bleak winters everyone feels like sleeping in the warmth of a quilt but a sportsman will still rise at 4 or 5 and go for his workouts. Why? because the goal is set. Similarly, if your child would be aimless, there are chances of him/her to fall prey to menace like drugs.
I remember the words of Vivekananda. These words are very apt for all the young people. Just keep repeating this thought over and over again. “Take a thought, make it your life. Ponder on it and dream about it. Make it an integral part of your dreams. Make it a part of your mind, brain, veins and each and every part of your body and forget everything else”.
This thought of Vivekananda is apt for every young person and that is why I say that each person should have an ambition in life. Having an ambition does not allow your focus on unnecessary things.
Some take it under peer pressure because it looks “cool”, some consider it as a style statement. So sometimes the youth inadvertently fall into this serious trap, due to the wrong mental perception. Addiction is neither cool nor a style statement. In reality, it is a precursor to destruction. So whenever your friends boast about their drug habits, do not applaud and enjoy such conversation. Do not be a mute spectator to such absurdities. Have the courage to stand against such conversations and say NO. Have the guts to despise such a conversation, reject such a conversation and have the guts to tell the person that he is wrong.
I would like to share some views with the parents too. These days none of us have time. All of us are running against time to earn our livelihood. We are racing against time to improve the quality of our lives. But in this blind race, do we have the time to spare for our kids. Do we ever work for our kid’s spiritual progress and discuss it with them, rather we discuss only material progress. How are they doing in their studies, what has been their progress in exam, what to eat and what not to eat, where to go and where not to go – majorly these topics form the core of the entire interactions. Do we share such a relationship that our children can bare their hearts to us? I request all of you to do this. If your children share a frank relationship then you can very well know what is going on in their life. Children do not take to bad habits suddenly. It happens gradually and it also impacts the home. Observe the changes that are happening in your home. If you observe closely then I believe that you may be successful in detecting the problem at the very beginning.  Be aware of your child’s friend circle and don’t keep your conversations focused just about progress. Your concern should extend to their inner depths, their thoughts, their logic, their books, their friends and their mobiles - how and where are they spending their time. These need to be taken care of. I believe that no one else can do what a parent can for their kids. Our ancestors have left us certain pearls of wisdom and that is why they are known as statesmen. A saying goes like this:
Paanch Varsh Laaw Lijiye
Dass Laaw Tadan dei
Paanch Varsh Laaw Lijiye
Dass Laaw Tadan dei
Sut Hi Solah Varsh Mein
Mitra Sarij Gani Dei
This means that till 5 years of age a child should grow in the loving and tender care of his parents, by the time he is 10 the values of discipline should be inculcated in him. Sometimes we see that an intelligent mother gets angry and does not speak with her child throughout the day. This is a big punishment for the child.  The mother punishes herself but the child too gets punished in turn. The mother just has to say that I will not talk and the 10 year old will remain worried the whole day long. He changes his habit and by the time he is of 16 years then the relationship should turn like a friend towards him. There should be an open conversation with him. This is a brilliant advice which has been passed on by our ancestors. I would like to see this inculcated in our family life.
Another thing brought to our notice is the role of the pharmacists. Some of the medicines lead to addiction. So such medicines should not be distributed without a doctor’s prescription. Sometimes a simple thing like a cough syrup can trigger addiction. It becomes the starting point for addiction. There are quite a few things that I would not like to raise from this platform. But we will have to follow and accept this discipline.
These days many children from villages go to city for higher education and start living in a hostel or a boarding school. I have heard that sometimes these avenues become the entry point of such addiction. For this the education system, the society and the security force will have to act as a vigilante. Each one will have to fulfill their roles and responsibilities. The government will fulfill the responsibilities on its end. We should constantly strive to fulfill our obligations.
I would also like to mention about the letters we have received. Some of them are interesting, some are filled with grief and some are inspiring. I cannot mention all, but I would like to mention one. There was a certain Mr. Dutt. He was deep into addiction .He was also jailed where he had several restrictions. Then later his life changed. He studied in jail and then his life was transformed. His story is very famous. He was in Yerawada Jail. There might be many such inspiring stories. Many people have been victorious in their fight against addiction. We too can come out of such habits and so we should definitely try. We should make efforts for de-addiction and rehabilitation. I would ask celebrities to be a part of this initiative - be it from the field of cinema, sports or someone concerned with public life. Be it the cultural or spiritual world, we should use every possible platform to create awareness. There should be constant messages in public interest. They will certainly have an effect. Those active on the social media, I would request them to create a continuous online movement by joining #DrugsFreeIndia hash-tag. This is more relevant because most of the addicted youth are a part of the social media. If we take this #DrugsFreeIndia hash-tag movement forward then we will do a great service for public awareness and education.
I want to take this concern forward.  I would request all those who have successfully come out of this addiction to share their stories. I touched this topic because like I said in the beginning grief becomes less on sharing. This is a topic of national concern and I am not here to sermonize. And neither am I entitled to preach. I am just sharing my grief with you. Those families who are suffering from this menace, I want to share their pain as well. I want to create a responsible environment. There can be difference of opinions but let us make a beginning somewhere.   
Like I mentioned before, I want to share happiness. Last week I had the opportunity to meet the Blind Cricket Team. They had won the world cup. What joy and excitement, they were exuding great self confidence. God has given us everything, eyes, hands, legs i.e. we are totally capable yet we lack this kind of determination and passion which I could see in the blind cricketers. What zeal and enthusiasm, really it was contagious. I felt super charged after meeting them. Such incidents bring great pleasure in life.
In the past few days there was yet another important news. The cricket team from Kashmir defeated Mumbai on their home ground. I do not view it as a matter of someone’s victory and other’s loss. I view it differently.  All the stadiums in Kashmir have been inundated after the floods.  Kashmir is passing through a tough phase. The circumstances have been extremely grim with these boys not standing any chance to practice. But the Team Spirit shown by these boys, their conviction and determination is awe inspiring. These boys have shown us that one can overcome the most trying and testing circumstances if one remains focused on our goals. This news gave me immense pleasure and I take this opportunity to congratulate all these players on their victory.
Two days back, the United Nations has decided to celebrate June 21st as International Yoga Day. It is a matter of great pride and honour for India. Our ancestors developed a beautiful tradition and today the entire world is associated with it. It does not merely benefit one personally but it has the potential to bring all the people together globally. The entire world came together on the issue of Yoga in the UN and a unanimous resolution was passed just two days back. 177 countries became the co-sponsors. In the past when it was decided to celebrate the birthday Mr. Nelson Mandela, 165 countries became co-sponsors. Before that efforts were on for International Toilet Day and 122 nations became co-sponsors to that initiative too. For celebrating Oct 2nd as Non Violence Day 140 Countries became co-sponsors, before that. But 177 countries co- sponsoring Yoga is a world record of sorts. I am thankful to all the countries that have come out in support and have honored the sentiments of the Indians and decided to observe World Yoga Day.  It is now our duty that Yoga reaches out to the masses in its true essence.
Last week I had the chance to have a meeting with the Chief Ministers of all the states. This tradition has been going on for the past 50-60 years. This time it was organized at the Prime Minister’s residence. We started it as a retreat program with no papers, no files and no officers. It was a simple interaction where the Prime Minister and Chief Minister were all the same, seated together like friends. For an hour or two, matters of national concern were seriously discussed in a friendly atmosphere. Everyone just poured their hearts out. There was no political agenda involved. This too was a memorable experience that I wanted to share with you.
Last week I had the chance to travel to the North East. I had been there for three days. Many a times youth express their desire to see the Taj, Singapore or Dubai. But I would urge all the nature lovers, all who want to experience the divinity in nature, to take a tour of the North East. I had gone earlier too. This time when I went as the Prime Minister, I tried to explore its potential. Our North east has tremendous potential and possibilities. It’s a land of beautiful people and beautiful surroundings. I was filled with immense joy visiting that place. Sometimes people ask Modi ji don’t you get tired? I want to say that whatever little fatigue I had, well the North East took it away completely, I am thoroughly rejuvenated. Such is the pleasure that I derived from that visit. The love and respect accorded by the people there is something that will stay with me forever. The kinship and affinity showed by the people of the North East touched me deeply. I will also tell you, it is not a joy for only Modi to enjoy, it is there for you to enjoy too.  So do travel to the North East and enjoy.
The next edition of Mann Ki Baat will happen in 2015. This is probably my last program in 2014. I wish you all a Merry Christmas. I would like to wish all the very best of New Year hes in advance. It gives me immense pleasure to know that this program Mann Ki Baat is broadcast in regional languages by the Local Radio stations that same night at 8 pm. And it is surprising to know some of the regional voice-over artists also speak in the voice very similar to me. I am surprised at the brilliant work being done by the artists associated at Akashvani and I would like to congratulate them. I consider this as an effective medium to connect to the masses. We have had tremendous response. Seeing the response Akashvani has devised a new method. They have taken a new Post Box number. So now if you wish to write into me you can write on this Post Box number.
Mann Ki Baat
Post Box no 111, Akashvani
New Delhi.
I will be awaiting your letters. You do not realize that your letters become my inspiration. Some suggestions penned down can do good to the entire nation. I am thankful to you all. We will meet next in 2015 and on some Sunday morning we will again have our own Mann Ki Baat.
Thank you very much.
#DELIMITER#
11 12 2014, India
World Diamond Conference, Delhi
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I am delighted that Delhi is hosting the World Diamond Conference. We are especially pleased that President Putin is here with us today.
He is a leader of India`s key strategic partner and, personally, a great friend of India. In addition, Russia is the source of more than a quarter of the world`s production of diamonds.
I understand that this is the first conference of its kind in the world. This is a source of great pride for us.
I want to congratulate and thank Gem and Jewellery Export Promotion Council, the Ministry of Commerce and Industry, and, the World Diamond Mark for organising this event.
India is the natural venue for this conference.
For one, it is generally believed that diamond is India`s gift to the world. More than two thousand years ago, diamond was deeply valued in India. It was even traded with China over the Silk Route.
और अभी पुतिन जी बता रहे थे कि किस प्रकार से भारत का हीरा दुनिया में जगमगा रहा था।
It was even traded with China over the Silk Route.
Till about the 18th century, India was considered to be the only source of diamond.
Till of course, the world began mining for diamond in Africa. I am delighted that South Africa`s Minister for Mineral Resources is with us today. Thank you, I welcome you here.
Today, India is the world`s largest centre for cutting and polishing diamond and its largest importer of uncut diamond.
Diamond has become a universal symbol of wealth and enduring love. But, in India it is also a great source of jobs for our people. The Gems and Jewellery Sector in India employs nearly 3.5 million people; 1 million of them work in the diamond industry.
यानि अपने आप में Gems and Jewellery जहां पर करीब 35 लाख लोगों को रोजगार मिलता है, और उसमें दस लाख लोग सिर्फ डायमंड के क्षेत्र में काम कर रहे हैं।
India today exports cut and polished diamond worth 20 billion US dollars.
Surat has emerged as the biggest centre in the world for cutting and polishing diamonds.
और इसलिए मैं कभी-कभी कहता हूं जैसे करीब-करीब 30 प्रतिशत डायमंड रशिया देता है और इसलिए मुझे लगता है कि हर डायमंड पर - जब डायमंड यात्रा करता है रशिया से तो हर डायमंड पर रशिया के कदमों के निशान होते हैं। लेकिन जब एक पॉलिश डायमंड निकलता है तो उसके ऊपर इंडिया की उंगली के निशान होते हैं।
It hosts enterprises with some of the most advanced technologies and machinery in the world.
Although the Bharat Diamond Bourse was established in 2010, it has become the world`s largest exchange in the world.
Few in India would be aware that out of ten polished diamond pieces sold globally, nine have been processed in India.
यानि दुनिया का कोई भी व्‍यक्ति अगर हीरे-जवाहरात से सजा हुआ है, तो मान लेना कि दस में से नौ हीरो पर किसी न किसी भारतीय की उंगली लगी हुई है।
The diamonds sparkle in the world because of the skills of Indian workers.
So, we welcome the efforts of this conference and the World Mark Foundation to increase the global market for diamonds.
However, rough diamond in India comes from abroad. And, it mostly comes indirectly through places like Antwerp and Dubai. Of course, Antwerp trade is now run mainly by Indians.
While most of rough diamonds from Russia come to India, less than 20% comes directly to India.
We have with us today the head of Russian company Alrosa, which controls most of the production and trade in rough diamonds in Russia. It has direct sales contract with 7 to 8 Indian companies.
I know that there are representatives of many bourses here. But, I will be honest and say that I want major diamond mining companies to sell directly to the Indian diamond industry. It will be good for them and for India.
I have made three proposals to President Putin.
First, I would like Alrosa to have direct long term contracts with more Indian companies. I am pleased to know that they are moving in that direction.
Second, I want Alrosa and others to trade directly on our bourse. We have decided to create a Special Notified Zone, in which major mining companies can import rough diamonds on a consignment basis and re-export unsold ones. This is going to benefit Indian diamond industry and create more jobs for our youth.
Third, I asked President Putin to reform regulations so that Russian jewellery makers can send their rough diamond to India and re-import polished diamond without paying duty.
This will give a boost to our diamond industry. These measures will also boost India-Russia economic ties.
India and Russia have outstanding cooperation in a broad range of areas. We want to focus on transforming our economic relations. We want to make this a key pillar of our relationship.
Our joint partnership - here is an indication of our new approach to expand our economic partnership.
President Putin`s enthusiasm for Russian participation in our Make in India programme will help expand manufacturing and create jobs for our people.
There are many other sectors in India, like the diamond industry, which have huge potential for creating employment and generating exports. Their modernisation and development is a great priority for my Government.
I am deeply encouraged by the level of international participation. In every sector of business, you will find that India not only offers productive business opportunities, but it is also easy to work in. You will find an environment that is welcoming and responsive.
Thank you all for coming.
#DELIMITER#
11 12 2014, India
Visit of President of Russia
President Vladimir Putin and members of the media,
It is truly a great pleasure to welcome President Putin to India. We have met twice at the opposite ends of the world - in Brazil and Australia. I am honoured to host him in Delhi for the annual Summit. Since the turn of the century, he has been a key architect of our partnership.
President Putin and Prime Minister Vajpayee launched the annual Summit process in 2000. When Prime Minister Vajpayee held the first of summits in Moscow in November 2001, I was there to sign the sister-state agreement between Gujarat and Astrakhan.
President Putin is a leader of a great nation with which we have a friendship of unmatched mutual confidence, trust and goodwill. We have a Strategic Partnership that is incomparable in content.
The steadfast support of the people of Russia for India has been there even at difficult moments in our history. It has been a pillar of strength for India`s development, security and international relations. India, too, has always stood with Russia through its own challenges.
The character of global politics and international relations is changing. However, the importance of this relationship and its unique place in India`s foreign policy will not change. In many ways, its significance to both countries will grow further in the future.
Russia has been India`s foremost defence partner through decades. My first visit outside Delhi as Prime Minister was to our new aircraft carrier, INS Vikramaditya. It sails our seas as a great symbol of our defence cooperation. Even as India`s options have increased today, Russia will remain our most important defence partner. We have conducted joint exercises across all three wings of the Armed Forces in the last six months.
President Putin and I discussed a broad range of new defence projects. We also discussed how to align our defence relations to India`s own priorities, including Make in India.
I am pleased that Russia has offered to fully manufacture in India one of its most advanced helicopters. It includes the possibility of exports from India. It can be used for both military and civilian use. We will follow up on this quickly.
I also proposed that Russia should locate manufacturing facilities in India for spares and components for Russian defence equipment in India. He responded very positively to my request.
Energy security is critical for India`s economic development and creating jobs for our youth. Russia is also a key partner in this area.
I am pleased that the first unit of the Kudankulam Nuclear Power Plant is on stream. It has added 20% to the existing capacity for nuclear power in India. We are on course for installing the next three units of 1000 MW each. Today, we have outlined an ambitious vision for nuclear energy of at least ten more reactors. It will have the highest standards of safety in the world. It will also include manufacture of equipment and components in India. This also supports our Make in India policy.
Russia is the world`s top source for hydrocarbon resources; and, India one of the world`s largest importers. Yet, despite our close friendship, our collaboration in this sector has been disappointing. Today, we have made a new start with a few important agreements. But, we will set an ambitious agenda for partnership in oil and natural gas.
Today we have taken a number of decisions and signed several agreements. They also reflect our shared belief that in today`s world, vibrant economic relations constitute a key pillar of a strong strategic partnership. Similarly, closer contacts between people and in areas like education, culture and tourism are important.
I thank President Putin for his support for India`s closer relations with Eurasian Economic Union. The International North South Transport Corridor will connect us better. And, today, we will jointly visit the World Diamond Conference. This highlights our new innovative approaches to strengthening economic relations.
President Putin and I agreed that this is a challenging moment in the world. Our partnership and the strong sensitivity that we have always had for each other`s interests will be a source of strength to both countries.
I conveyed my deepest condolences for the loss of lives in the terrorist attack in Chechnya. This also reflects our many shared challenges. Our areas of priority for our cooperation include combating terrorism and extremism; advancing peace and stability in Afghanistan; working together for a stable, balanced, peaceful and prosperous Asia Pacific; and, cooperating for development in other countries.
Institutions like BRICS, East Asia Summit and G 20 have also widened our framework of engagement.
This is President Putin`s eleventh Annual Summit and my first. This Summit reinforced my conviction in the extraordinary value and strength of this partnership. I am confident that our bilateral cooperation and international partnership will acquire new vigour and scale new heights in the years ahead.
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
1 12 2014, India
Hornbill festival, Nagaland
Good morning. Ladies and gentlemen, it is a great honour for me to be here amongst the friendly Nagas to celebrate the world famous Hornbill Festival. I greet you on this joyous festive season. I congratulate the Nagas for organizing this wonderful festival, which aims to preserve, promote and protect the unique cultural diversity and rich traditions of Nagaland. 
I also congratulate the people on the occasion of 51st anniversary of Nagaland’s statehood. On this auspicious day, I urge the Nagas that after 50 years of statehood, Look back! Introspect! And take stock of the ground you have covered so far and what remains to be achieved. I have seen the strength of your society today. A very rich cultural heritage. This must be promoted. 
Your culture must not only be interpreted as your colourful dances and songs, but the Naga culture of sturdiness, honesty, simplicity, reflected in all your deliberations and actions. The Naga way of life means pride in your inherent strong character and your hard working attitude. 
I also know that you have a rich biodiversity. Your region is located in one of the 25 hot bio-diversity areas of the world. This must be protected at all costs, even as your embark on sustainable development of your resources. People will come to your state for investment or tourism and they will do so because of your amazing bio-diversity and salubrious climate. 
Nagaland is blessed in having a young population well-versed in the English language and in tune with what is happening around the world. This is an advantage which must be tapped. You must capture the IT outsourcing business of the world in this part of the country. 
I also greatly admire the equal position of Naga women in the Naga society. I recall how smartly our young Naga women jawaans worked while deployed during the Delhi Commonwealth Games. This participation brought great pride to our nation and was a shining example for our womenfolk across the country. The contribution of half of our population to the growth of our society is immeasurable. 
Nagas are sports-loving people and have the potential to perform well in disciplines such as boxing, tae kwon do, football and archery. I feel that these activities must be promoted in a systematic way to realize the potential of the people of the region, given the right direction. 
I know that it has been over a decade since Prime Minister Vajpayee visited Nagaland. I think, nowadays, if I want to come to Nagaland from Delhi, or if anyone from here wants to go to Delhi, it hardly takes 10-15 hours. But Prime Ministers took more than 10 years to reach here. I assure the people of Nagaland that you will not have to wait this long for the Prime Minister to visit again. I assure you. I will be happy to come often to meet the people of Nagaland. 
I will come back to see to it that everything that I have mentioned becomes a reality. 
Come, let us together build a new, resurgent, stronger and more prosperous India, as well as our Nagaland. 
Friends, for the last 2-3 days, I have been in this part of our country. I think it is the first time that an Indian Prime Minister has stayed in the North-East for 3 days. In India, the word “SEZ” is very popular. Special Economic Zone. But after being here for the last three days, I must say that it is not only SEZ, it is NEZ. When I say NEZ, I mean Natural Economic Zone. The other parts of India will have to find man-made Special Economic Zones. But here, Natural Economic Zones (already exist). But unfortunately, they are untapped. 
It is my priority to nourish this NEZ for NE, North-East. NE is meant for NEZs. NEZs are meant for NE. 
I took charge as the Prime Minister six months back. And I would like to mention some of the initiatives we have taken for the North-East in the last 6 months. I am sure that this is the right time to mention these initiatives as we are celebrating the Hornbill Festival and preparing for Christmas. 
The scheme called “Ishaan Uday” is a special scholarship for students from the North-East, under which 10,000 students will benefit. The scheme called “Ishaan Vikas” will provide opportunities for internships and visit at IITs, NITs, NIFTs in other parts of India during vacation for the students of North-East. Every year 2,000 students and 500 teachers will benefit from this scheme. 
We have decided to establish one modern apparel garment manufacturing centre in every state of North-East. We know that we have a rich heritage in the field of textiles. We have a mastery in weaving. Our women carry this art in their fingers, and we have to utilize this capability for the development of this area. And for that, we have decided to begin with Nagaland, Assam and Sikkim. The Central Government will spend 20 crore rupees for this new programme. 
During the tenure of the Vajpayee government, a unique decision was taken by Atalji. It was decided at that time that 10% of the Annual Plan Budget will be spent on the North-East states. My government has made a provision of Rs 53,000 crore in the Union Budget for development of the North-East. Rs 28,000 crore will be provided for construction of 14 new railway lines. There are so many tourists here from other parts of India and foreign countries. This is the best tourist destination. All we need is road, rail, and air connectivity to develop tourism here. 
Energy is lifeline. We cannot do anything without energy or power. The North-Eastern region power system improvement project has been sanctioned at a cost of Rs 5,000 crore for six North-Eastern states including Nagaland. This will strengthen intra-state transmission and distribution systems. Our goal is 24x7x365 power supply. 
Nowadays, the meaning of infrastructure has totally changed. Even if you have road-rail-air connectivity, it is not enough. You require Digital Connectivity too. Under the Comprehensive Telecom Development Plan for the North-Eastern region, we have sanctioned Rs 5,000 crore for 2G mobile coverage for enhanced connectivity between this area and the world. 
We have decided to establish a National Sports University in Manipur, and the people of Nagaland will be among primary beneficiaries of this sports university. 
We have decided to set up 6 new Agriculture Colleges in North-East. I am sure that North-East can become India’s Capital of Organic Agriculture. North-East can become a source of Organic Agriculture products for the world and for humanity. 
Friends, it is a great opportunity for me to be a part of this Hornbill festival. We are very eager to develop our tourism sector. There is a tremendous untapped scope for India in this field of tourism, and we are focussing on it. There are people, even in India, who do not know what a rich bio-diversity we have in this part of India. 
Seeing is believing. And I am sure that people here from different parts of India can see what a unique cultural heritage this part has. I am sure that this Hornbill Festival will improve the tourism sector of Nagaland, the people of Nagaland will be beneficiaries of this growth. And when the people of Nagaland become prosperous, the whole country will be the beneficiary. 
I am thankful that the Chief Minister invited me to attend this festival. I am sure that in the next 10 days of this festival, lakhs of people will come here to be a part of this festival. Thank you very much.
#DELIMITER#
1 12 2014, India
ONGC Tripura company power plant
I have been travelling in the North East for the past three days. Perhaps no other Prime Minister had the privilege of spending so much time with the people of North East, but I have been fortunate enough to get this opportunity. This is my last programme here. The love, welcome and respect that has been accorded to me by the residents of North East has overwhelmed me and I express my heartfelt gratitude and I am thankful to you all from the core of my heart. 
My first programme in the North East was concerned with speed and this last one is concerned with energy. For progress energy is required and so is speed, but most importantly direction is needed. And for the Nation’s development we have chosen the North East Direction. There have been talks of Look East policy. Now is the time to move from Look East to Act East policy. And within the ambit of this Act East policy we want to move forward at great speed for the development of this region. 
Today in Tripura the Central government in collaboration with the State government is launching the biggest project in terms of Capital investment worth Rs 10,000 crore for a 726 mega watt power project. Such a small state but such a huge investment for such a large project! This is an opportunity for Tripura to make a mark on the world map. The entire world is working in the direction of Climate change; talks are on to implement Kyoto Protocol. This project in Tripura will follow all the norms of Kyoto protocol thereby lending Tripura a chance to make a mark in the Green Energy movement. 
Recently the SAARC Summit took place. The Prime Minister of Bangladesh Begum Hasina ji was also present. An important decision was taken in the SAARC summit. It was decided that the nations will strive together for energy production and use energy for mutual benefit as a common commodity. 
Now that the SAARC Nations have agreed, I will request Bangladesh and I offer to provide electricity to Bangladesh if it intends to purchase it. We are in that position. And I am making this declaration from a place which has shared Bangladesh’s joys and grief during the period of its freedom movement and creation. The Minister of Bangladesh was telling me “I am visiting after 41 years and in 1971 when freedom movement was being fought I came here to seek refuge and today I have come again” and he was feeling very satisfied. 
Some time back the Chief Minister was discussing new schemes regarding petroleum sector and fertilizers plant. We also want to develop the economy using gas based energy resources. The ONGC has doubled its budget related to gas production. They will be able to utilize this expanded budget in regions like Tripura which have abundant supply of gas and in turn rev up the nation’s economy. These energy projects will enhance the job possibilities for the youth of North East and that is what our major focus is. 
A few days back I had been to Japan. We have signed an agreement with the government of Japan. The North East is also going to be benefitted by this agreement. The youth of North East is going to be benefitted by this agreement. India and Japan have taken a joint decision to try and create an economical corridor from North East to Myanmar. For this to happen so that the region grows fast we are emphasizing on this aspect so that Japan also lend its support to us. In my opinion the North East will no longer remain a neglected and secluded corner of India. The future of North East is bright. 21st century is called the Century of Asia. If this is so, that it is the century of Asia then North East is the door to all Asia and in a way it is a door to prosperity and I am seeing these possibilities. A comprehensive plan to strengthen the infrastructure with rail connectivity, road connectivity, removal of digital divide, benefit of marine routes needs to be put in place. As the Chief Minister was mentioning just now that all these facets should be incorporated in a one point programme. This one point programme is to bring in the newest infrastructure in the North East and open its horizons for progress and development. 
Today I also wish to express my gratitude to the Prime Minister of Bangladesh Begum Hasina ji for her support. They have helped us considerably in bringing machinery and equipment to this place which otherwise would have been very difficult. Bangladesh has set an example of how two nations can come together for a project. This will also set a precedent for SAARC nations to see that how two neighbouring countries can come together for common welfare and produce such vital commodities like Power from even a small place like Tripura. This event sends out this positive message to the SAARC nations.
Not only this, if there is coordination among states, there is cooperation among states then such a major benefit can be achieved. In this project all the states of North East have taken collective responsibility for transmission. That the states take up collective responsibility itself lends a new hope for future development. I express my heartfelt gratitude to all the Chief Ministers of all the states for coming up and creating such an environment of cooperation. This is our Mantra too; Cooperation from all and Development for all. If we move ahead with this motto then we can scale many new heights. 
In the entire North East there are a few sectors that I feel needs to be especially emphasized upon. In our country we respect our Tricolor. We all honour and respect our Tricolour. But I take inspiration from the tricolor for a four pronged revolution. I am talking of a multifaceted revolution. 
One is Green Revolution. One of the colours of the tricolor is Green. Green gives us a message for green revolution. But in this second green revolution the people of the North East can make a difference by focusing on Organic Farming and the agricultural product which has a worldwide market to capture. A huge potential exists here for the same and we want to strengthen that. 
Second is the White colour. There is ample scope for Milk revolution in the North East. There is unlimited potential for Animal Husbandry. We should focus on the second colour and think how to bring about this second Milk Revolution. 
Third is the saffron colour. I am talking about a saffron revolution. We need a Green Revolution, a White revolution and a Saffron Revolution. When I talk of a Saffron Revolution some people may get alarmed. They will start thinking what is it that Modi is planning? Saffron is the colour of energy so when I talk of Saffron Revolution I am taking about an Energy Revolution. We should be benefitted by Solar Radiation. How do we strengthen solar energy potential? How do we incorporate energy into Gas based economy and provide an overall solution? We need to move forward bearing these factors in mind. 
And fourth is the Blue colour of our Ashok Chakra. This blue colour symbolizes the strength of water, it represents the marine force. How do we strengthen our Marine force? The entire North East has immense water sources. It is the basin of Brahmputra. There are numerous waterfalls. So how do we channelize this blue revolution so that it changes our economy? How do we develop it to its fullest potential taking it to be a vital source of energy? This should be our focus. 
With this four pronged revolution we intend to change the destiny of not only Tripura but the entire North East. We have to strengthen our efforts so that the youth here gets employment. 
In India, the place with the largest wealth of natural resources and the greatest potential for tourism is the North East. No other State in India can match it. This region abounds in biodiversity. We have to attract the entire India here. And for this, connectivity needs to be emphasized. We have to enhance the connectivity by strengthening the rail connectivity, the road and the water connectivity. And so we have to move in a new direction where Tripura and the entire North East are able to scale new heights of development. 
Today this 726 MW power project comes to completion. When the first stage got completed Honorable President came here. Today on final completion I have been given the privilege of coming here. I salute Tripura’s contribution in increasing the energy production. My heart is filled with pride and satisfaction as I dedicate this project to the Nation. I once again thank Bangladesh for its contribution. We offer to sell power to Bangladesh to meet its power requirements. India can work towards bringing light to Bangladesh also. 
Thank You. 
#DELIMITER#
30 11 2014, India
Sangai Festival, Manipur
The Chief Minister was just speaking on a lot of topics - there are no roads, no hospitals and nothing of Film Division of any sort. I felt satisfied to hear him discussing these problems as it made me feel that this Chief Minister trusts this government to change things. And since he has such faith in my government, I feel the need to fulfill these wishes. 
The Porbandar-Silcher Road that he mentioned - I had laid the foundation stone of the road in Gujarat at Porbandar in the capacity of Chief Minister of the State during the period of Atal Bihari Vajpayee government. It is also possible that I come here for a similar inauguration in future. But all the subjects that the Chief Minister has mentioned are important. We too are keen on developing North East, the land of Ashta Lakshmi and hence we have allotted a budget of about Rs 60000 crores towards the development of its infrastructure. 
During the bilateral talks in Myanmar on my recent visit there, the maximum impetus was on the subject of how to establish connectivity with Imphal. Be it air connectivity, road connectivity or i-ways, it should benefit everyone and the government of Myanmar has also taken important decisions to get associated with the infrastructure projects with the government of India so that this region can be made more accessible. You will surely notice the results in the coming days. 
Today, I have had the good fortune of being here for the Sangai festival. Our country has a lot of potential for tourism. No matter where in the world a tourist goes, our one State of India is capable of showcasing more than all that one country can offer the tourist. A tourist can easily tour a State for a month and if he keeps visiting our country every year, choosing to experience a new State, a lifetime wouldn't be enough to see entire India. Every State of our country has a different highlight, such varied is the heritage of our country! 
North East and especially Manipur have a lot of opportunities for the development of tourism. Like the Chief Minister just pointed out, I belong to Gujarat. Krishna is celebrated in Dwarka there and I have been brought up in a similar environment, worshipping Lord Krishna. When I saw you worshipping Lord Krishna, singing his praises, I felt right at home in Manipur. 
The world tourism sector has an estimated potential worth 3 trillion dollars. If there is any one sector that is growing by leaps and bounds globally, it is the tourism sector. Some places have shown a growth of 40 per cent in this sector. India has a lot to offer to the world that can influence and inspire them. But this area is still largely untapped. It is our constant effort to attract the world through our rich heritage. 
The game of Polo was born here. There was a Polo programme arranged here yesterday, in which, according to the information I have, 8 countries participated. This is your heritage. I want the world to know about the place that gave birth to Polo and hence I will match steps with the state in its efforts to highlight their assets. 
I just met with delegates from the HRD Ministry and asked them if there was a possibility of about 100 students from all the universities of the country visit North East as tourists. Only if university students start visiting, the tourism scene of the region will change drastically. 
They have already begun work towards making this a possibility and you should be able to see the results soon. And there is such diversity of heritage in Manipur. There is song, dance, theatre, costumes and what not. It is truly reflective in its rich cultural heritage. The reason of my joining in the Sangai festival is the same. I want the world to see what Manipur has to offer and when they see the PM visiting, they might want to find out what the hoopla is all about. 
There are two theories - one that says if the infrastructure is developed, tourism will develop and the other goes if tourism prospers, infrastructure will have to develop. Both theories carry equal weight. If tourism prospers, the quality of infrastructure will improve which in turn will bring in more visitors. These changes take place gradually over a period of time. We just need to create a friendly environment. 
If there is good connectivity then there will be a droves of visitors here. I firmly believe that tourism is one such sector that gives maximum returns in the minimum investment. Everyone - from a snack vendor, an auto rickshaw driver, a florist, a vegetable vendor to a cab driver, a guest house owner and even those offering the option of home stay and a tea vendor - everyone can benefit from the development of tourism. I will be particularly happy if the tea vendor earns well. What I mean to say is that even the poorest of poor would benefit from it. 
The government of India has recognised the power of Manipur and hence we have decided to establish a sports university here. Manipur has a huge role to play in India's achievements in sports. We want to harness this power to the optimum as this power is inherent in the DNA of the people of Manipur. Additionally, the people of Manipur have a sportsman spirit and we want to set an example for the rest of the country. 
Some people think that a sports university only helps in creating good players but that is not the case. A sport in itself is a large economy. Right from making a playground to those who write scoreboards, the one involved in collection of data, those looking after the players' food habits, physiotherapy and sportsman costumes - everyone finds employment. The youth of Manipur who might not have been able to become players but they can train themselves in this university to become an umpire, a scorer or become a physiotherapist of a good sportsman or can become dietician of a good sportsman, they can also become makers or architects of a playground. In a manner, opportunities of overall development are associated with a sports university. Many people might otherwise think that a sports university would mean a place where players would be trained. But that is not the case. It is a science, an economy, a complete creation with elements of technology, arithmetic and many such elements. You cannot imagine the amount of changes a university can bring about in Manipur. 
When I visited Australia recently, I have asked them to collaborate with us on the Manipur Sports University. I want to connect the countries of the world with Manipur and you will reap the benefits in the coming days. 
The youth of Manipur wants job and there is a need for skill development that will eventually lead to jobs. I have also asked an IT professional that I just met, to focus on the possibility of establishing call centers here in cities like Manipur, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Mizoram etc. instead of in cities like Hyderabad and Bangalore. The weather here would diminish the need of air conditioners, thus bringing down the cost hugely. The youth here also speak fluent English, so the language shouldn't be a barrier. I am trying to get this done. I will try and pull some companies here due to which there will be a lot of opportunities for the youth here and they wouldn't have to leave Manipur in search of better jobs. 
I have also thought of the possibility of employing the youth of Manipur in the police force of Delhi. When the world sees the youth from the North East policing the streets of Delhi, keeping it safe, they will realise the true potential of these States. I want to work towards this as well. 
When I was the Chief Minister of Gujarat, I had a plan that wasn't put into action. I had envisioned a strategy of sort where every State of the North East - 8 of them - will select and send 200 women each to be a part of the police force in Gujarat, in every two years. So, a total of 1600 women would have joined the police forces in Gujarat. Imagine the kind of national integration that would be! 
At the same time I had also emphasised how Gujaratis were the best tourists in the whole world. No matter where you go, you will find a Gujarati there. We like to roam around, spending the wealth we have. So as per my plan, if 1600 girls would stay in Gujarat for 2 years, they would at least mingle with 15-20 families each who would in return visit their State thus enhancing tourism. I have told the Chief Minister of Gujarat to explore the possibility and if anyone from the North East wants to visit Gujarat, we would welcome them with open arms. Imagine the benefits these states will reap by associating with a prosperous state like Gujarat. 
Therefore, my brothers and sisters of Manipur, all the points that have been raised by the Chief Minister at the closing ceremony of the Sangai festival today, naturally having faith in me, please be assured that I will do my best to keep that faith as I am a man who tries to live up to them. I will go back and discuss the issues with the people of the concerned departments and see what can be done about them. I will also try to fulfill all the promises I have made here today and put all the plans into action. I will also expect that the manner in which Manipur has made us proud in the field of sports, similarly it becomes the flag bearer in the arena of development. 
However, I am deeply concerned by one issue here which I would like to address. The youth of Manipur are victims of drug abuse and this deeply hurts me. My heart goes out to the parents of such youth. It is our responsibility to ensure that our future generation does not suffer due to this. It is a dangerous path and it is not about an individual but the whole family and eventually the society and the country suffers immensely due to this. 
Hence we need to make a collective decision as a society, to ensure that we will end this. In a land where Lord Krishna and his miracles are celebrated, where we find the country's best players, we will not let Manipur suffer from such a disease. The youth of Manipur have the capability of changing the future of the country. Drugs destroy everything and today as we have gathered here at the pious occasion of the Sangai festival, I request the youth of Manipur to give up drugs. I know it is a difficult addiction to kick, but once you decide, you will be able to come out of it. Once you save yourself, you and your family will benefit from it and grow. 
With this request, I thank the people of Manipur for inviting me here and being a part of your celebrations. Thank you! 
#DELIMITER#
30 11 2014, India
Conference of Director general/inspector general of police, Guwahati
My colleague in the Council of Ministers Shri Rajnath Singh ji, all the honourable Chief Ministers of Northeast, Shri Kiran Rijiju ji and all the officers and leaders of the police force. I heartily congratulate all those who have been honoured today. 
Since the times of Chanakya, we have studied what is vital for nation’s security, more than having advantage of good weaponry; it depends on who has those weapons. But even more important than having weaponry and trained manpower handling those weaponry, is having the best intelligence network; as the success of any nation’s security depends on it. The system that has the best form of intelligence will never require either the weapon holder or weaponry and there definitely won't be any need of use of weapons. If there is any unit that holds utmost importance in terms of nation’s security, it is the intelligence system. I have been privileged enough to honour the officers serving in this arena. I would like to once again congratulate them for their excellent service. 
Everyone is surprised that the tradition of holding this conference in New Delhi since so many years has been discontinued and the ceremony has been shifted from Delhi to Guwahati. But you must have noticed that when you come to Delhi for a meeting, you come there with a lot of work. You feel that since we have come all the way to Delhi, you might as well get with a few other things done like visit the ministry, meet the secretaries. But now you need to concentrate a little on the issues faced by the state. Now the meeting is out of Delhi and hence from the time you have come here, you must have been well acquainted with each other. There is no other activity here, so the entire focus will be on the ongoing activity. And the one to benefit the most would be the people of Northeast, the police force here would be very happy and encouraged and this would also help you understand how big result a minor change can bring about. It is possible that later in life you also take this initiative. This is an auspicious beginning. In the future too we want such events to take place outside Delhi in different states. I am sure Delhi will also get a chance; it is not that Delhi will never host such meets anymore. But when the programme is held in Delhi, there is no role played by the Delhi police. The Indian Government and Vigyan Bhavan are ready with your accommodation, where you stay in your quarters and then leave. This is a change and every system of change needs to have a life. Robotic systems do not work. Systems should be alive and full of life. Systems should encourage and augment the liveliness and this change will lead you in that direction. I am sure you will also adopt similar experiments in your state. 
You have been here since yesterday and there have been talks - some of serious nature and there have been some light conversations. Even I am going to be with you till today afternoon. I want to spend maximum time listening to you. But there are a few things that I want to express today. After our country’s independence, the fact that 33 thousand policemen have sacrificed their lives while protecting the country and safeguarding the comforts of its citizens, is by no means, a minor feat. But does the entire police force know that 33 thousand policemen have sacrificed their lives to protect the country? How would then the common citizens of India know about this fact? I feel it is of prime importance that this sacrifice does not go waste. How can their respect get enhanced in the society? He also must have been someone's son. And he has died in the line of duty and I do not know why we have not shown enough concern towards them. I would want a small taskforce to be formed from amongst you, consisting of some senior and experienced people. We should be able to find out ways to incorporate the positives from the heritage of this sacrifice in a manner such that it is embedded as our inspiration forever. A protocol also has to be set up to honour them during their last rites. Every state has its own police academy where the new recruits are trained. I want to know if their syllabus can include a thorough knowledge comprised in a comprehensive book based on the life of all those who have sacrificed their lives from that region. Every state should have its own book - an official Government Book. Who has sacrificed their life, at what occasion, how did they lose their life in the line of duty, what courage did they show and how many lives they did they save; all should be mentioned in the book. The new generation of police, the new constables who are under training, will learn these things. He will have to read this book too and answer an exam on the same. Through this, he will realise of the martyrdom of those before him who sacrificed their lives. This will then be passed on through the generations. Should we bring out a new edition of the book every year? We can decide now that every state publishes an e-book that mentions the martyrdom of all these 33 thousand martyrs with their photos which can be sourced from their families. It should be in the regional and national language. This will be a small effort but one with huge repercussions in form of the inspiration. I have also noticed that the police department holds a lot of programmes for police welfare. Cine stars are a part of these programmes and performances and plays are also a part of it. It is done in a grand way in Mumbai. During this time, a souvenir is also issued. Advertisement is asked for and funds are collected. I have not gone into the details, nor do I wish to. But can we decide to include a list of those who have sacrificed their lives in that particular year in the souvenir, speaking of their deeds. We shouldn't let their lives go waste in this manner. He may not be physically alive, but for the police force and the society, he should never die. It is our responsibility. I don't want to discuss if something similar has happened in the past but something like this should happen now as I believe it will make a huge difference. 
The other thing is police welfare. I am well aware that the police force leads a life full of stress. He puts his life on the line of fire for his duty. If there is no well-being and happiness in his family, how will they go on duty? No matter how sacrificial and selfless the police officer is, family's discomfort also causes him discomfort. It is the role of the government and all of us to establish a system for the welfare of their families. Everything from them and their family's health check up to their children's education should be taken care of. How are the residential facilities of those in the lower ranks? Someone should pay some heed to this. And it's not as if this is not happening. A good thing now is that our home minister was a successful Chief Minister of one of the biggest states of our country. And hence he knows the nuances of this topic. His guidance will be of a lot of help to us in the coming days. It has also been my privilege that since I was a Chief Minister for quite a long time and held the control of the home department, I am also aware of the way it functions. I am aware of what goes on the ground. And hence it might be a possibility that we are treating this on priority. We want to approach the task of police welfare in a scientific manner and that is the bare minimum we can do. And if we do this, then there will be a huge change. 
Sometimes the movies depict a policeman in a certain grey light and this goes into the minds of common man. I have seen a very few movies that talk about the sacrifice of these policemen and that is the reason such an image of policemen has embedded in the minds of a common man. We should make special efforts. The Indian Government should make a PR Agency of sorts and meet the film producers and make them aware of their deeds. If the opinion-makers of the society won't protect the integrity of the ones who protect our country, then the rot in the system will also not go away. If there is a kid in the family who keeps committing a mistake, we don't reprimand him for every mistake of his and instead try to point out his achievements then he on his own starts focusing on the good and developing on it. There will be limitations, who doesn't have them? But there is a way to overcome these limitations with the help of the society. I want the thought process of the country towards the policemen to change keeping the onground realities in mind. Any negative story about a policeman has a long shelf life in the media but many positive things never even come to the fore. 
When I was in Gujarat, I had conducted an experiment and you too can try it if you find it to be applicable. I don't know what happened after I have left Gujarat. I don't know if they are still following that or not. But I had made a request to every police station to build their own website where they would update their week's best of the best social activities. Whatever the week's positive highlight was, whether they worked towards a social cause or helped a needy and treated them with respect, saved someone from heavy losses… all this would be updated on the website. There are a lot of instances; there is no dearth of such incidents that can be highlighted. Please don't be depressed, there are a lot of good things happening in the country due to you but if you don't bring them out in the open, no one will know about it. We put up a positive story that is absolutely true on the website every week and see the kind of changes it brings in people's perception towards the police. There is no need to be artificial; there are enough positive things to be highlighted. Every person you meet will have at least one positive story to tell about a policeman. But such facts are not collectively presented to the people. I want you to think on this positively and develop a plan of action to take it forward. We will discuss this in detail when we meet. 
I have a concept in my mind - that of SMART police - a SMART police force. How can we work with this vision? When I talk about SMART police I mean S - Strict but also S - Sensitive, police should be Strict yet Sensitive, M – Modern and there should be Mobility, there should be no stagnancy, A - Alert and Accountable, R - Reliable and Responsive, T - Techno savvy and Trained. We have to take these five points and march ahead. I truly believe we can fill the police force with a new life and a renewed sense of consciousness. 
Once again, I would like to thank and congratulate all those whom I have had the privilege of honouring today. In future too, the mighty police force will be successful in serving the citizens, protecting them and most importantly instilling in them a sense of faith. The rest, we will discuss in detail when we meet. 
Best wishes, thank you. 
#DELIMITER#
29 11 2014, India
Flagging off train from Meghalaya to guwahati
My Dear Brothers and Sisters of Guwahati who have gathered here in large numbers
Today is an important event in the history of railways. One more of the Indian states are going to be connected through rail network. Today, a new route from Mendipathar in Meghalaya to Guwahati in Assam gets connected by rail. Also there is yet another occasion for the railways as the foundation for a new rail route from Bhairabi to Sairang in Mizoram will be laid. So both these projects where one rail route is being opened up and foundation for another is being laid presents a unique occasion. 
There are those of us who believe in Vaastu though I must confess that I do not know much about it. But if I were to believe what the experts say then the North East corner of the house should be well kept. It should be clean and its sanctity should be maintained at all times. If this is done the house will forever prosper. Well, I cannot verify these claims but what I do know is that if we are able to take care of the North East India, the ‘Ishan’ corner of our homeland , then the entire India will prosper. 
So if we want India to prosper, the progress of the North East will need to be fast tracked. The first step in this direction will be the development of infrastructure. Those who are futuristic and have a great vision always start with the development of infrastructure. Once infrastructure is developed then the people themselves take development forward. 
Many of you must have heard about South Korea. It is a small country with a population of about 5-6 crores. It is along the sea coast. It was a very poor country. We talk about the poverty in India but think of a country poorer than India. But the rulers there thought of building a highway at par with international standards right in the middle of the country. This became a hugely controversial decision. People were angry that they had no food, the children had no access to education, they had no homes to live yet their ruler was thinking of spending hundreds of crores of on construction of a road. But their ruler was a man of grit and determination. He went ahead with his plans and built the road despite the criticism. And that one road changed the face of the entire nation. 
A few years back we too hosted the Commonwealth Games. We are a large country but what did we do? Whatever happened in Delhi, the negative publicity and the disgrace that followed is known to one and all. That same small country of South Korea was able to hold Olympics in their country about 12-15 years back and host a worldwide audience. That nation prospered and poverty was eradicated. And how did they achieve that, by just one road – that opened the doors of prosperity for them. 
The American President Kennedy said, it is not wealth that creates roads but it is the roads that lead to the creation of wealth. In the plans for development, infrastructure occupies a significant place. If the North East has to develop and play an important role in the development of India, then infrastructure development should be a priority. It is my firm belief that these 8 North Eastern states, our Ashta Lakshmi, (eight goddesses of wealth) have the potential of bringing in prosperity for the entire nation. If these eight states are connected to the Nation’s infrastructure which includes roads, rail and all other types of connectivity, if we are successful in doing so which I am sure we will then there will be no looking back. There is a new higher middle class which takes family vacations once or twice each year. They are always scouting for new destinations. With better connectivity North East will become the heaven which every tourist desires. The beautiful landscapes, the dense jungles and above all the warmth of the people here will make it the most sought after destination and I am sure that people from all over India will be thronging the place. 
And with this thought of developing the North East, our new government that has been recently formed, in its first budget itself allocated a sum of Rs. 28,000 crores for the development of rail network in the region. I have a firm belief that once this network is laid my people will themselves take this region to new unprecedented heights of progress and development. In the changing world scenario, it is believed that this century belongs to Asia. And if this is a century of Asia then have we made any preparations? There is an emphasis on Look East policy. We believe that if this century belongs to Asia then we are definitely going to make the most of it. And how do we intend to achieve it? Not just by following Look East but by following Look East Act East policy. And we are now moving form just Look East to Act East policy. It is our effort that North East gets connected by road and rail to Myanmar and other East Asian countries. If this is achieved, this region will become the centre of trade and commerce. This region will hold the potential for redefining progress. And then, the youth of North East will not have to leave their homeland endowed with natural wealth and go elsewhere to big cities in search of livelihood. 
Times are changing and so we have to move forward with new concept of infrastructural development. The infrastructure too needs to be with ethos of next generation. In the past building rail, road, ports and airports was perceived by the people a lot was done. But now the world is changing. Now highways are required as are i-ways. Information ways, i-ways. There is no place for a digital divide. North East should be an integral part of the Digital India dream. It should have both i-ways network and connectivity. The facilities should be such that whatever one is able to achieve sitting in Delhi same should be available to a person living in the difficult terrains of the North East. 
The world is changing. Why shouldn’t there be gas grid? Why shouldn’t there be access to 24 hours of fresh water supply? Why shouldn’t there be electricity supply round the clock? Why shouldn’t there be an optical fibre network? We have to develop infrastructure keeping the new and changing times in mind. This concept of next generation infrastructure development for a Modern India should be conducted at a fast pace and should be actualized as soon as possible. The children of North East are educated in English. If there is proper optical fibre coverage and smooth connectivity then the youth of North East can do the same job work from home in their own village as is being done in Hyderabad and Bangalore. They do not need to go to Delhi and Bombay for call centre jobs. This can happen in North East itself. This world here can change hence I am taking a special interest in the development of the North East. 
A few days back I had visited Myanmar. I had discussions with the heads of state regarding improved connectivity, improved trade and greater utilization of the local human resource. Dear brothers and sisters, this rail connectivity is not only about passengers commuting from one place to another. It is a medium that connects us, gives us pace and speed and also provides us strength. The Indian railways have the potential to become the backbone of all economic activities. But instead of considering it as the energetic force of economic development we have made it completely insignificant. Nobody from the parliament or the nation ever pays attention to the discussions of the railway budget. 
The moment Railway Minister starts speaking, the statements that are greeted with applause are the ones related to increase in number of coaches or extension of some route or upgradation of some station. 
We have divided railways in such small parts. We should not be satisfied if a coach is added and applaud it or feel happy if a new route is opened. We will not be satisfied with these petty gains. We have to both expand railways and also modernize it. We are aiming at both horizontal and vertical expansion of the railways. By horizontal expansion I mean expanding its reach to every nook and corner of the country. By vertical expansion I mean the upgradation of services which involves technology upgradation, speed enhancement to save time and enhancement of facilities. It will be our endeavour to see that railways truly become an engine facilitating the economic growth of the nation in true sense. 
I have complete faith that under the dynamic leadership of our new Rail Minister, Mr. Suresh Prabhu railway will witness many fold progress in comparison to the progress made in the past 100 years. For the first time in the country’s history we have made a decision that of 100 % foreign direct investment. We are looking at 100% foreign investment in the railways. People will come, invest money, create moderns trains, create modern rail lines, modern signaling system will be implemented , modern ticketing system will be put in place – the entire railway system will be modernised. 
In a country of 125 million everyone has been a passenger some or the other time. Some people travel once a year and some people travel many times in the same day but the underlying fact is that everyone travels. So you can imagine the large commercial market that exists. We can also strive towards making eco friendly and environment friendly railways. Thus we can play an important role in the fight against global warming arising out of mass transportation. 
There are many facets which we want to involve in the creation of new systems using the railways. The entire functioning of the railways involves expertise, dedicated technology and continuous technology upgradation and for this human resources are required. Currently the railways advertise for vacancies and the people apply for jobs. Those who qualify for the interviews are subsequently trained for the services. We have thought of a new version which I am sure the new generation will definitely like. I have suggested establishing Railway University in four corners of the country. It will have all the courses and also courses dedicated to the functioning of railways. Thus on passing out, the youth will immediately find an employment opportunity with the railways. 
Human resource development along with technology upgradation, improvement in speed and management, improvement in facilities and delivery of services - this is our agenda. Our railway stations which exist right in the heart of big cities extend for miles. Land today is a major premium. But our railway stations continue to be the same as they were a hundred years back. Same chairs and benches to sit, same services to the passengers. But can’t this all be changed? We have asked for the railway stations to be privatised. The trains keep running below and above them five star , seven star hotels, motels or malls can be erected. The sky above the train is open so utilize it for income generation and enhance the services delivered at the railway stations- this is what I have explained to them. 
Railways have taken a call for the modernisation of some railway platforms. I hold the view that railway platform should be better than the airports. Because railway platform is used by the poorest of poor, the common man as well as a labourer hence the services at the railway platform have to change. You will see that within no time I will create 10 -12 model stations. Once this is attained, then the entire country will follow and our work will gain momentum. 
Brothers and sisters, we have to bring about a dramatic change in the railways. Our endeavour should be to be the best in the world and for that whatever new technology is required we will bring it in. 
By connecting the North East, this Ashta Lakshmi of India by rail we intend to make this region the most prosperous in India. We are working in that direction. I congratulate the railway officials and give them my best wishes. I congratulate the Rail ministry and the new Rail minister who will take this forward at a great speed. I congratulate the people of Meghalaya and Mizoram. I thank the governor and Chief Minister from all my heart. Let us all work to take our nation to new heights and our idea of progress should entail development for all, no region should be left behind. Let us move forward with the notion that development touches one and all, is inclusive and all encompassing, is fulfilling for everyone and extends everywhere. In taking this development forward, I thank everybody for their contribution. I express my gratitude to Shri Tarun ji. 
Thank You. 
#DELIMITER#
26 11 2014, Nepal
SAARC Summit
Prime Minister Sushil Koiralaji, my colleagues from South Asia
I am delighted to return to Kathmandu.
Koiralaji, congratulations on organising an excellent Summit
Thank you, Nepal, for your warm hospitality once again.
Greetings to the Observer countries present here.
This is my first SAARC.  But, this is the second time I am meeting most of you together.  I stepped into the office with the greetings of the entire world.
But, what moved me, dear colleagues, was your personal presence, with the good wishes of one-fourth of humanity.
Because the future I dream for India is the future I wish for our entire region.
The last Summit was three years ago.  Only two of us here were present in Addu.  Even Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina has come here after her re-election.  President Rajapaksa will soon go into one and I wish him good luck.  I especially welcome our newest colleague, President Ghani.
Ours is a region of thriving democracy; of rich inheritance; the unmatched strength of youth; and, a strong thirst for change and progress.
In the last few months, I have travelled around the world.
From the middle of the Pacific, to the southern coast of Atlantic Ocean, I see a rising tide of integration.
And, negotiations on major trade agreements such as Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, the Trans Pacific Partnership and the Trans Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership.
Because the barriers of boundaries inhibit progress; international partnerships add speed to it.
Because, in the life of an individual or a nation, a good neighbourhood is a universal aspiration.
Where does South Asia wish to stand in this world?
Nowhere in the world are collective efforts more urgent than in South Asia; and, nowhere else is it so modest.
Big and small, we face the same challenges - a long climb to the summit of development.
But, I have great belief in our boundless potential.
And, confidence  - that comes from the many inspiring stories of innovation and initiative in each of our countries.
There is much to learn from each other; even more - to do together.
That was the vision and aspiration that brought us together as SAARC 30 years ago.  We have travelled a long distance together since then.
We have an agreement, an institution or a framework of cooperation in every field.  We also have many successes.
Yet, when we speak of SAARC, we usually hear two reactions – cynicism and scepticism.  This, sadly, is in a region throbbing with the optimism of our youth.
Today, less than 5% of the region's global trade takes place between us.  Even at this modest level, less than 10% of the region's internal trade takes place under SAARC Free Trade Area.
Indian companies are investing billions abroad, but less than 1% flow into our region.
It is still harder to travel within our region than to Bangkok or Singapore; and, more expensive to speak to each other.
How much have we done in SAARC to turn our natural wealth into shared prosperity; or, our borders into bridgeheads to a shared future?
Yet, South Asia is slowly coming together.
India and Bangladesh have deepened their links through rail, road, power and transit.
India and Nepal have started a new era of cooperation in energy; and, India and Bhutan are making those ties stronger by the day.
With Sri Lanka, we have transformed trade through a Free Trade Agreement.
We will soon launch a new arrangement to meet Maldives' need for oil.
Distance and difficulties have not held back India and Afghanistan.
And, bus and train sustain contacts between people in India and Pakistan
We have given five South Asian partners duty free access to 99.7% of their goods and are prepared to do more with others.
For India, it has been a privilege to provide assistance of nearly 8 billion U.S. dollars in South Asia over a decade.
It may not seem a great amount in these times, but we are grateful for the opportunity to have made a difference to the lives of a few brothers and sisters in our region.
Each of us has taken our initiatives.
However, as SAARC we have failed to move with the speed that our people expect and want.
Some argue that it is because of the region's development gap. But, that should actually spur us to do more.
Or, is it because we are stuck behind the walls of our differences and hesitant to move out of the shadows of the past?
This won't resolve our differences, but will certainly deprive us of opportunities.
Today, goods travel from one Punjab to the other Punjab through Delhi, Mumbai, Dubai and Karachi – making the journey eleven times longer and the cost four times more.
India, too,  has its share of responsibility –because of our size and location. I know that many of your goods, too, have to do a Parikrama of India to reach their destinations.
Just think of what we are doing to our consumers - and to our environment!
We must shrink the distance between our producers and consumers and use the most direct routes of trade.  I know India has to lead, and we will do our part  hope, each of you will, too.
Infrastructure is our region's greatest weakness and it's most pressing need.
When I thought of coming to Kathmandu by road, it made many officials in India nervous.
Because of the condition of roads at the border!
Infrastructure is my greatest priority in India.  And, I also want to set up a Special Purpose Facility in India to finance infrastructure projects in our region that enhances our connectivity and trade.
We speak of ease of doing business in India.  Let's extend this to our region.  I promise to ensure that our facilities at the border will speed up, not slow down, trade.
Let's all make our procedures simple, our facilities better, our standards common and our paper work less burdensome.
India will now give business visa for 3-5 years for SAARC.  Let's make it even easier for our businesses through a SAARC Business Traveller Card.
Excellencies, India has a huge trade surplus with SAARC countries.  I believe that this neither right nor sustainable.
We will address your concerns and give you a level playing field in India.  But, I encourage you to attract Indian investments to produce for the Indian market and create jobs for your youth.
I also look to a future when your companies can easily raise funds in India for investments at home;
and, when we have cross-border industrial corridors, so that we can take advantage of the natural synergies and connected lives in our Border States.
I also believe that if we can light up each other's towns and villages, we can build a brighter tomorrow for our region.
Or, face a future when someone looks down at us from Space, and says that this is world's darkest corner.
Let us treat electricity as a commodity like any other that we invest and trade in.  India will fully support these initiatives in the region.
We should also think with ambition to use solar energy and micro grids to quickly provide clean power to villages across the region.
Our relations become stronger when we connect the lives of the ordinary citizens of our countries.  That is why connectivity and services by rail and road are so important.  We should also connect ourselves more by air.
We will not only make a difference to the lives of our people but also promote tourism in the region
We should use the strength of shared heritage and our diversity -  to encourage tourism within our region, and present South Asia to the world.   We could begin with the Buddhist circuit, but we don't have to stop there.
As we seek to build bridges to prosperity, we must not lose sight of our responsibility to the millions living without hope.
We must work with our compassion of our hearts, but also with the power of science.
In the area of health, India will meet the shortfall in funds to establish the SAARC Regional Supra Reference Laboratory for TB and HIV.
We offer the five-in-one vaccine for the children of South Asia.
We will support monitoring and surveillance of polio-free countries, and provide vaccines where it might reappear.
And, for those coming to India for medical treatment, India will provide immediate medical visa for the patient and one attendant.
Information technology has removed all barriers to quality education.  India is prepared to connect our South Asian students through online course and E-libraries.  When we set up India's National Knowledge Network, we will be happy to extend it to the SAARC region.
The dream of a South Asian University has become a reality in New Delhi.  But, to be truly South Asian, it must also have partnerships with at least one university in each SAARC country.
Excellencies,
India's gift of a satellite for the SAARC region will benefit us all in areas like education, telemedicine, disaster response, resource management, weather forecasting and communication.
We will also host a conference in India for all South Asian partners next year, to strengthen our collective ability to apply space technology in economic development and governance.
And, we plan to launch our satellite by the SAARC Day in 2016.
As neighbours, we should also be together in good and bad times.
India's capability and expertise in disaster management will always be available to South Asia.
Equally, as we reach out to our Indians caught in conflicts and disasters around the world, we will also be there for all our South Asian citizens.
Excellencies, a prosperous SAARC needs the strong foundation of a secure South Asia.
If we are sensitive to each other's security, and the lives of our people, we will deepen friendships, spur cooperation and advance stability in our region.
Today, as we remember the horror of the terror attack in Mumbai in 2008, we feel the endless pain of lost lives.
Let us work together to fulfil the pledge we have taken to combat terrorism and trans-national crimes.
For India, our vision for the region rests on five pillars – trade, investment, assistance, cooperation in every area, contacts between our people – and, all through seamless connectivity.
This is the call of our times.  This is the age of social media, where boundaries matter little.
There is a new awakening in South Asia; a new recognition of inter-linked destinies; and, a new belief in shared opportunities.
The bonds will flow.
Through SAARC or outside it.
Among us all or some of us.
We can all choose our paths to our destinations.  But, when we join our hands and walk in step, the path becomes easier, the journey quicker and the destination closer.
I say this as much to my government and people, as I say to you.
We are meeting in the lap of Himalaya, which has nurtured us through the ages.  Today, it is calling us to act.
Let us work to change cynicism into optimism.
Let us turn South Asia of flowering hope into a rich field of peace and prosperity.
#DELIMITER#
19 11 2014, Fiji
Address to Fiji Parliament
Excellency Speaker Dr. Jiko Luveni, Excellency Prime Minister Bainimarama, Members of the Parliament of the Republic of Fiji,
Nisan Bula and Namaste
Two months ago, Fijians voted in extraordinary numbers to elect their Parliament. Six months ago, Indians participated in the largest election in human history.
Today, I stand here, grateful for this special gift – the honour to be among you, to speak to this new Parliament, in celebration of democracy and to reaffirm our friendship.
India is a nation of more than a billion; Fiji a nation of a million.We are located in different oceans. But, what unites today is our democracy, the diversity of our societies, our creed that all human beings are equal, and our commitment to the liberty, dignity and rights of every individual. What also links today is that we have women as Speakers of our two Parliaments!
You have done better than us. One in every seven members in this Parliament is a woman; in India, it is just one in nine. So, I hope we can match you the next time; and, I hope we can both do better in future.
People in Fiji have different histories, ethnicities, languages and religions. But, they stand together as one nation of Fijians, with one voice, one vision and one aspiration. In both nations, we have vested power in our people. Your Constitution begins with "We, the people of Fiji", Ours begins with the same simple words, "We the people of India" And, what a Constitution you have framed! It is a Constitution that only not only guarantees freedoms and rights the citizens, but also to ensure their basic needs and empower them. From the right to life, liberty, dignity, equality and freedom of religion, To the right to education, information, work, health, food and water To the rights of children and the disabled. This is a Constitution that reflects the will of an enlightened nation.
The journey to this milestone had its struggles and setbacks, but the road you have chosen has won you admiration around the world and the support of the people here.
Honorable Members,
Fiji is a shining example of small nations that can successfully pursue great ambitions, Because what makes a nation successful is not its size or its population, but its vision and its values.
Today, Fiji is a nation that has used its economic resources well. You have been a strong voice on behalf of the Pacific Islands and a hub of this region. You led the G 77 with vision and statesmanship. Your soldiers have served with outstanding professionalism in UN Peacekeeping Missions in some of the world`s most dangerous spots. And, you are playing an influential role in shaping the global dialogue on climate change.
There are many in India, who wish Vijay Singh wore the Indian colours on the golf course!
Honorable Members,
For India, Fiji will always have a special place. The tide of history brought many from India to your shores. It has forged our ties of culture and kinship. But, our relationship today stands on a much broader of our shared values and our common interests as developing countries. And, now, together we were partners in making history.
You graciously hosted Indian scientists in Fiji for tracking our Mars Mission, Mangalyaan. It was the only mission in the world to succeed in the first attempt.
I convey today the gratitude of the people and the scientists of India. This simple yet profound act of cooperation reflects the boundless possibilities in our relationship, if we choose to seek them.
Our trade and investment ties have been modest. Our relationship in science, education and culture could be stronger. Yet, there are examples of our partnership that should inspire us – our cooperation in upgrading your sugar mills or the public-private partnership in the area of healthcare.
As we have collaborated in running hospitals here, we can also extend our cooperation in pharmaceuticals and traditional medicines.
As Fiji adjusts to the changing global markets, India is prepared to be your partner – In making your existing industry stronger and finding new opportunities for your youth. For countries like ours, village and small and medium scale industries are the source of enterprise and employment.
Today, I am pleased to announce a grant of 5 million U.S. dollars to strengthen and modernize Fiji`s village, small and medium industries. We will also provide a Line of Credit of 70 million dollars for a co-generation power plant at Rarav Sugar Mill. And, another Line of Credit of 5 million dollars for upgrading the sugar industry in Fiji.
Agriculture supports a majority of the population in India and Fiji. I offer our expertise and assistance in increasing productivity in the agriculture sector. As the largest producer of milk in the world, India can help develop your dairy industry, which can also contribute to your exports. In areas like fisheries, textiles and garments, and gems and jewellery, we can expand trade.
In this digital age, every nation can be part of the global information technology industry. And, it is a dream that youth around the world share. It is an industry that depends on ideas and skills. It offers a great path to prosperity. And, it has a light carbon footprint.
We were pleased to set up a centre of excellence in information technology here in Fiji. We are is prepared to work with you to build a Digitial Fiji and to equip your youth to integrate Fiji into the global IT network.
We will also deepen our cooperation in education and training and we will double the number of our scholarships.
Today, I propose that we work together to harness the potential of Space technology for governance, economic development, conservation, climate change and natural disasters.
We could work to make Fiji the hub for our regional collaboration in Space, just as India has done with ASEAN.
There are times when we think of each other as distant lands, separated by oceans and seven time zones.
But, think of the days when travel was difficult. That did not deter brave people from travelling over the seas in search of a new life. Distance, to me, is irrelevant in a world of fiber optic cables and satellite links. We are only as far away as the click of a mouse or the call button of a phone. In any case, a direct flight today can take you from Fiji to most places in India. And, I say this more to my people than to you.
Fijians have been steady in visiting India. We in India have not paid enough attention to this beautiful land of warm people and immense potential. This must change. We must make travel easier between our two countries. For this reason, I have taken a small step in extending visa on arrival to Fijians in India, as you have done for Indians. And, if you want to attract more Indians to enjoy the magnificence of your islands and the warmth of your hospitality, you should invite Bollywood to shoot their films in Fiji.
Honourable Members of Parliament,
We have spoken of vast opportunities, but we also share many common challenges. For you, climate change is not a matter of debate, but a basic question of existence.
India, too, is a nation of a long coastline and more than 1000 islands, a nation that is nurtured by monsoon rain and the Himalayan glaciers.
We, too, are facing the searing impact of climate change. And, we spend more than 6% of our GDP in adapting to its consequences. Now, each of us must shoulder our own responsibilities. We cannot side aside and take no action. Technology has made it possible.We don`t have to seek old pathways to prosperity.
In India, we have a comprehensive national plan and strategy to both mitigate and adapt to climate change. And, I have a deep personal commitment to it. And, we look forward to working with Fiji in areas such wind and solar energy. But, it is also equally important that the global community accepts its responsibility and implements its commitment. It should not become one in which the strong shift the burden on the others; or impose the responsibilities of their excesses on the choices that others make. It should not be an issue of economic advantage or trade competitive of one over the other.
The world had agreed on a beautiful balance of collective action – common but differentiated responsibilities. That should form the basis of continued action. This also means that the developed countries must fulfil their commitments for funding and technology transfer.
India has stood shoulder to shoulder with Fiji and the Small Islands Developing States is seeking a fair and urgent response from the international community for a sustainable future.
We also have shared stakes in a peaceful, cooperative and prosperous Asia and Pacific regions. Stretching from the Indian Ocean through continental Asia into Pacific, this is a region of enormous dynamism and opportunities, but also a region with many challenges.
Fiji is a leader in the region and a strong voice in the developing world. Together, we can also work for a future in the region, in which there is an equal place for all nations - big and small, developed and developing – and a climate of peace and tranquility.
I thank Prime Minister and Fiji for their leadership in hosting my meeting with the Pacific leaders later today.
Let us join hands to create an ocean of opportunity that stretches from the Indian Ocean to the Pacific Ocean.
Sometimes our relations have been adrift.
Sometimes our relations have been adrift.
Let us chart a new course. Let us start a new era - When it does not take another 33 years for an Indian Prime Minister to visit Fiji. When Fijians and Indians work with each other from the comfort of familiarity and the ease that comes with the habit of regular partnership.
When we draw strength from the ties of history and the bonds of emotions; seek new purpose in our many shared interests; and seize our new opportunities.
Thank you Vinaka (Thank you). Dhanyawad.
#DELIMITER#
19 11 2014, Fiji
Pacific Island leaders meeting
Excellencies,
• I am very grateful to you all for sharing your thoughts. All the issues raised today are of interest to all of us.
• Your remarks give me a much better flavour of your perceptions and priorities.
• India has always been keen to work closely with you to advance your development priorities.
• India wishes to be a close partner of the Pacific Islands.
• I would wish to announce a number of measures to strengthen this partnership.
1. Setting up of a Special Adaptation Fund of $ 1 million:
• Climate change is a major issue of concern for Pacific Island Countries.
• By setting up this Fund, India would be happy to provide technical assistance and training for capacity building to our Pacific Island Partners.
ASO_3906
2. Pan Pacific Islands Project:
• Given the distance between the islands and poor connectivity, e-networks are an effective means for coordination.
• In keeping with the success achieved in the pan-Africa Project, we propose to develop Pan Pacific Islands Project for telemedicine and tele-education.
• We are also working on a solar energy project with the Pacific Islands at the community level. The regional hubs will be developed in the Pacific Islands.
3. Indian Visa on arrival all the fourteen Pacific Island Countries:
• I have noticed the inconvenience in travel due to Visa issues.
• I would wish to provide Visa on Arrival for nationals of all Pacific Island countries, Cook Islands, Kingdom of Tonga, Tuvalu, Republic of Nauru, Republic of Kiribati, Vanuatu, Solomon Islands, Samoa, Niue, Republic of Palau, Federated States of Micronesia, Republic of Marshall Islands, Fiji and Papua New Guinea.
• I am confident that this will facilitate exchanges and promote better understanding between our peoples.
4. Increase in Grant-in-Aid to Pacific Island Countries:
• Currently, we provide Grant in Aid of 125 thousand US Dollars annually to each Pacific Island Country for community projects selected by you.
• I am happy to announce that we are increasing this aid to $ 200,000 annually. This would be rolled over annually.
5. Establish Trade Office in India:
• This has been a long time request from you to promote trade between India and Pacific Island Countries.
• We are ready to support the setting up of a Trade Office at an existing diplomatic representation in New Delhi.
• We shall also provide complimentary space to Pacific Island countries during exhibitions organised by ITPO to showcase your products.
• We need to find complementarities in our trade. India could be important source of low cost medicines. 
• We can do joint research in traditional medicine. Explore options of developing healthcare facilities for the benefit of people in the region. 
6. Deputation of ITEC experts:
• We will continue to share our experience and expertise with allof you.
• In this context, I propose that we shall depute technical experts to your countries including in the fields of agriculture, healthcare and IT.
7. Training to Diplomats from Pacific Island Countries:
• We shall be happy to expand our efforts for your diplomats. 
• In this context, Foreign Service Training Institutes will organise training programmes to the Diplomats of Pacific Island countries. These would be held here and in India.
8. Distinguished Visitors Programme:
• I propose to commence a Distinguished Visitors Programme.
• Under this we can organise seminars and invite friends from the region. This would help to explore new ideas for strengthening our mutually beneficially economic cooperation.
9. Space Cooperation:
• We propose cooperation in use of Space technology applications for improving the quality of life of our people and communications.
• We can look at possibilities of sharing data that could be used for monitoring climate change, disaster risk reduction and management, resource management.
10. Forum of India-Pacific Island Cooperation: • Lastly, given the response I have received today, I propose that a Forum for India – Pacific Islands Cooperation (FIPIC) be held on a regular basis. The next meeting can be held in 2015 in one of the coastal location in India.
Excellencies,
• I thank you once again for your kind presence today. I look forward to seeing you in India next year. 
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
19 11 2014, Fiji
Statement to media
Prime Minister Bainimarama, Distinguished members of the media
I feel really privileged to have the opportunity to visit Fiji. I am delighted that this moment has come so early in my tenure.It is also soon after a successful parliamentary election in Fiji.
I want to congratulate the people of Fiji on a remarkable election and you, Mr. Prime Minister, for your victory.
From the time we arrived, I have been charmed and moved by Fiji`s beauty and your extraordinary welcome.
I regard Fiji as an important partner for India. We have deep and enduring ties of history and culture. Fiji is an influential voice in the Pacific Region and the developing world, and our partner in multilateral institutions.
We face many common global challenges. We have shared interests in peace and cooperation in our inter-linked ocean regions.
Our bilateral relations and international partnership has been strong. But, we are also aware that the relationship has at times been adrift; and that our cooperation should be much stronger than it is.So, I see this visit as an opportunity to renew an old relationship and lay the foundation for a strong partnership in the future.
Prime Minister and I had very productive talks. I complimented him for seeking to build an inclusive Fijian nation, which guarantees rights, and provides a life of opportunity and dignity, to all its citizens.I thanked him for including India in his priorities and for his leadership in promoting India-Fiji ties.
We agreed to consult more closely on international issues of mutual interest, including international trade, climate change, United Nations Peacekeeping and UN reforms.
Fiji could serve as a hub for stronger Indian engagement with Pacific Islands.
We will also expand our defence and security cooperation, including assistance in defence training and capacity building. We agreed to identify opportunities to expand our trade and investments and work out a concrete roadmap.
In addition to traditional areas of economic cooperation, we look forward to closer engagement in areas like information technology and Space applications.
India will remain a committed development partner for Fiji. I thanked him for his support on India`s new assistance projects in Fiji. These include:
• a Parliament Library; • A fund of five million US dollar to promote small business and village enterprises in Fiji. • A line of credit of 70 million US dollars for a co-generation power plant. • And, doubling the scholarships and training slots in India for Fiji.
We will do more in other areas such as tourism and cultural exchanges. I am happy to announce Visa on arrival for Fijians.
India and Fiji feel the impact of climate change.
We are also prepared to increase cooperation in renewable energy, especially solar and wind energy, and in building capacity to adapt to climate change.
In addition, we could share our experience and expertise in disaster management and response.
Let me also thank you, Prime Minister, for providing a great platform for the first ever interaction between India and Pacific Islands.
I want to offer to convey a special word of gratitude from the people of India for hosting Indian scientists for tracking India`s Mars Mission earlier this year. Together we made history.
I am confident that this visit, especially my meeting with Prime Minister Bainimarama, will mark the start of a new era India-Fiji relations.
I am looking forward to the rest of my day here, including the honour of addressing the Parliament.
Thank you
#DELIMITER#
18 11 2014, Australia
Address at the reception
Prime Minister Tony Abbott, Leader of the Opposition, Ministers, Leaders of Victoria, Friends, All the eminent people gathered here and Our great cricketers,
This has been an extraordinary visit to Australia.
You hosted a great G20 Summit. It showcased Australia`s global role.
In the past four days, I have experienced everything that Australia is known for natural beauty, sunshine, great cities, friendly and cheerful people, organisational skills and strengths that have made you an economic force in the world.
Prime Minister, you have been truly generous with your hospitality and warmth.
I am deeply honoured that you have come to Melbourne to host such a wonderful reception.
This memory will stay with me forever;
But, I can tell you that all Indians are deeply touched by this Reception.
Many Indians wake up early on a cold December morning to watch on TV a Boxing Day Test at this magnificent stadium! I know that India has not done particularly well in this ground! But, we won the 1985 Champions Trophy here. And, Gavaskar and Kapil Dev are here!
As is Laxman, who especially loved to bat against Australia. To speak to you at this historic ground comes close to scoring a century here especially against McGrath and Brett Lee. I met him yesterday. The best I managed was to head the Gujarat Cricket Association.
This would be a deserving venue for the Cricket World Cup finals 2015. I hope that our two teams will play that match.
No business is serious enough to keep an Australian and an Indian  from discussing this great game.
We can learn from Australia`s famous sporting skills in other areas, too.
And we have decided to collaborate on a Sports University in India.
What we also see is the importance of relationships between people.
It is said that Melbourne is the best city in the world to live in.
Sydney might not agree!
India can learn from Australian experience and benefit from your expertise.
India is experiencing urbanisation at a rapid pace. Studies suggest that by 2031 11% of the world`s urban population might be in Indian cities.
We already have over 50 cities which have a population of more than 1 million.
Urbanisation can be an enormous opportunity.
In India, we have yet to build much of our urban infrastructure for the future.
Our plans include 100 smart cities; revival of heritage cities; building modern solid waste management and waste water treatment systems in 500 cities; and, cleaning up our rivers.
This is part of our larger vision of a sustainable future for our country, and transforming the quality of life of our people. In cities and villages alike.
I want to build a future, when every Indian, can say, yes, my life has improved and my environment has become better.
I am confident that we will achieve it with the support of the people of India, and through the talent and energy of 800 million youth, below the age of 35 A generation that is eager for change and committed to work for it.
A successful India will be a vast opportunity and a force of good for the world.
We look forward to closer partnership  with friends like Australia.
Prime Minister Abbott and I have spent a good part of this week together in two countries and four cities.
I have also met the political leadership, business leaders and the vibrant Indian community.
We have achieved a lot in the last few days.
One thing we all agree on. The bonds between the countries are made strong by joined hands of our people.
So, our exchanges in sports, tourism, education and culture are great source of strength for our relationship.
As I see the warmth and friendship for India today and over the last five days. I feel great confidence in the future of our relationship.
My memorable visit to Australia  ends tonight, but a new journey of our relationship has begun.
Thank you  and hope you are all coming to India soon!
#DELIMITER#
18 11 2014, Australia
Joint session of Australian Parliament
Speaker of the House of Representatives, Madam Bronwyn Bishop, President of the Senate, Stephen Parry,
Thank you, Mr. Prime Minister, my friend, Tony Abbott!
Congratulations to you and the people of Australia on a successful G20!
I am the third Head of Government you are listening to this week!
I don't know how you are doing this! May be, this is Prime Minister Abbott's way of shirt fronting you! But, I am truly honoured and humbled by this opportunity to speak to you.
I stand here as one of you - a representative of the people; I come to you with the greetings of 1.25 billion people of a nation, linked to Australia by the great Indian Ocean; by our connected history and our many shared inheritances- and, even more by our deeply interlinked destinies. And, today I have come to unite in spirit, as we were once by geography - spirit that is fed by many stirring stories of human success and sacrifice.
This morning, Prime Minister and I honoured our soldiers, who 100 years ago made the supreme sacrifice together in the battle of Gallipoli. The man who designed this beautiful capital of Canberra, Walter Burley Griffin, lies buried in the old city of Lucknow in India.
More than 150 years ago, an Australian novelist and lawyer John Lang fought the legal battle for a brave Indian freedom fighter, the Queen of Jhansi, Rani Laxmi Bai against the British East India Company in India's first War of Independence. He also lies buried in the Indian hill town of Mussoorie.
parliament
The statue of Gandhi in Canberra is a symbol of our shared values.
We celebrate the legend of Bradman and the class of Tendulkar together.
We are impressed by Australian speed as you are charmed by the Indian spin Until of course Shane Warne came along!
But, above all, we are united by the ideals of democracy.
Today, as I stand in this temple of democracy, I consider nations such as ours to be blessed, because democracy offers the best opportunity for the human spirit to flourish, because we have the freedom to choose, the right to speak and the power to remove – and, for us in politics, with no option but to leave with grace.
Generations of people's representatives have made Australia one of the great nations of the world today. From the vast stretch of territory to the abundance of resources, Nature has been generous to you. But, it is the people of Australia, who have made Australia what it is today: A beacon of democracy and rule of law; a nation that willingly leads the search of a lost aircraft; one of the most prosperous nations in the world;among the best in human development index; a nation with some of the best cities in the world; some of the most productive farms and mines; some of its best universities and research centres; an advanced technology base; and, a nation with great sporting skills.
Australia evokes images not just of immense beauty, but also of a great quality of life. Today, its cities are alive with richness of this world’s diversity. And, it is home to 450,000 Indians, who are as proud to be part of Australia as they are of their Indian heritage.
Honorable Members,
There was a time when, for many of us, Australia was a distant land on the southern edge of the world.
Today, the world sees Australia to be at the heart of the Asia Pacific and Indian Ocean region. This dynamic region holds the key to this world's future; and Australia is at its cross-currents. And, as Australia has become more engaged in this part of the world, we welcome its growing role in driving this region's prosperity and shaping its security.
Because we, in India, seek the same future for this world.
parliament
We also see Australia as a vital partner in India's quest for progress and prosperity. There are few countries in the world where we see so much synergy as we do in Australia. India a nation of more than a billion seeking development; Australia a developed country of a few million people and vast resource. Since the turn of this century, India has been the second fastest growing economy in the world. Millions have lifted themselves out of poverty into a new life of possibilities.
Today, we have a government with a clear majority after thirty years. From the remotest village to the biggest cities, there is a new high tide of hope in India; a new energy.
It is the energy of our youth – the 800 million people below the age of 35 – eager for change, willing to work for it - because, now they believe that it is possible. That they can make it happen. It is this force of transformation that we will unleash.
In the six months that we have been in office, we have moved forward, thinking with ambition, acting with speed; seeking growth not just for growth, but to transform the quality of life of every Indian – 
I see Australia as a major partner in every area of our national priority.
In providing skills and education to our youth; a roof over every head and electricity in every household; the most affordable healthcare for the most difficult diseases; the next generation of infrastructure that does not take a toll on our environment; Energy that does not cause our glaciers to melt - clean coal and gas, renewable energy or fuel for nuclear power; cities that are smart, sustainable and livable; villages that offer opportunities; agriculture that yields more and farms that are better connected to markets; practices and technology that save water.
We have a new Mission for turning "Made in India" into a global name just as Computer in India is. But, we want to find new pathways to prosperity, not simply travel down the roads of the previous century.
Much of India's future cities and infrastructure is yet to be built and so we have a unique opportunity to make our choices now. And, in every sector – agriculture, food processing, mining, infrastructure, manufacturing, finance and technology, energy; from providing funds and resources to technology and expertise; working as partners and investers -Australia has immense opportunities to participate in India's progress.
In turn, India will be the answer to your search for new economic opportunities and your desire to diversify your global economic engagement; your source for world class skills at home or for a manufacturing location abroad.
India’s development, demography and demandprovide a unique long term opportunity for Australia – and all in the familiar framework of democracy. There is no other example of this nature in the world.
Indian investors, too, are coming here in growing numbers and commitments.
Honourable Members,
This is an age rich in promise, but also filled with challenges.
We can only pursue our dreams, if we have the confidence that our cities are safe, our nations are secure, our region is stable and our world is peaceful.
This vast region has many unsettled questions and new challenges. Historical differences persist despite growing inter-dependence. The oceans are our lifelines. But, we worry about its access and security in our part of the world more than ever before.
Our region has seen huge progress on the foundation of peace and stability.
But, we cannot take this for granted. Preserving it will be the most important task in the region. India and Australia can play their part in it - by expanding our security cooperation and deepening our international partnerships in the region.
But, we do not have to rely on borrowed architecture of the past. Nor do we have the luxury to choose who we work with and who we don't. But, what we do need is to work together and with others to create environment and culture that promotes the currency of co-existence and cooperation; in which all nations, small and big, abide by international law and norms, even when they have bitter disputes.
We should collaborate more on maintaining maritime security. We should work together on the seas and collaborate in international forums. And, we should work for a universal respect for international law and global norms.
We must also support the process of economic integration across the region and an open global trading system that remains integrated. We must guard against regional trade initiatives becoming instruments of political competition. However, economic integration by itself won’t be a strong basis for peace and stability, without strong regional institutions.
India and Australia are members of several institutions that are critical for this region and the world. We should coordinate more closely in East Asia Summit, G20 and the Indian Ocean Region Association. 
Honorable Members,
In our inter-connected world, our shared challenges extend beyond our region. Terrorism has become a major threat for us all. In India, we have seen its face closely for three decades. And, we see it with the clarity that comes with it.
Terrorism is changing in character and expanding in its reach. Internet has made recruitment and call to violence self-generated. It also feeds off money laundering, drug trafficking and arms smuggling.
We have to deepen our bilateral security cooperation. But, we need a comprehensive global strategy for a global problem. It will require closer security cooperation; but, even more,a policy of no distinction between terrorist groups or discrimination between nations; a resolve to isolate those who harbour terrorists, willingness to empower states that will fight them; a social movement against extremism in countries where it is most prevalent; and, every effort to delink religion and terrorism.
As I look to the future, we would also need to ensure that outer Space and cyber space remain instruments of connectivity and prosperity, not new frontiers of conflict.
Responding to the region's disasters, combating proliferation, acting against piracy, we can work together on a full range of security challenges.
Honorable Members,
Since my Government entered office, no region has seen more intense engagement on India's part than Asia Pacific region - because we understand how deeply our future is linked to this region. India and Australia can play cricket hard with each other – and I suspect we will next month. But we see Australia as one of our foremost partners in the region.
I was pleased to host Prime Minister Tony Abbott as my first State Guest in September.
It has taken a Prime Minister of India 28 years to come to Australia. It should never have been so. And, this will change.
Australia will not be at the periphery of our vision, but at the centre of our thought. So, we stand together at a moment of enormous opportunity and great responsibility. I see a great future of partnership between India and Australia and, a shared commitment to realize it.
Prime Minister Abbott started us on this new journey in September. I have come here to set our two countries more firmly on that course. With your help, and with the help of the great people of India and Australia.
I wish you the best for hosting a great and successful World Cup Cricket early next year.
Thank you all.
#DELIMITER#
18 11 2014, Australia
Statement to media in australia
His Excellency Prime Minister Tony Abbott Friends from Media
I thank Prime Minister Abbott, the people and the Federal and the State Governments of Australia for a wonderful visit so far.
Prime Minister Abbott and I have spent the last week together – at the East Asia Summit, the G20 and for this bilateral summit. This reflects the broad framework of our relationship, defined by a growing partnership in the cause of a peaceful and prosperous world, and a strong and broad-based bilateral relationship.
This is a natural partnership, arising from our shared values and interests, and our strategic maritime locations.
India and Australia have a great economic synergy. There are huge opportunities for partnership in every area we can think of – agriculture, agro-processing, resources, energy, finance, infrastructure, education, and science and technology.
The economic climate in India has changed. I believe it will be a lot easier to convert opportunities into concrete outcomes. Prime Minister Abbott and I discussed what we should do to impart real momentum to our economic partnership.
Reconstituting the CEO Forum is an important step. We have agreed to speed up negotiations on the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement. I also asked for easier access for Indian business to the Australian market and quicker investment approvals.
India will hold a ‘Make in India’ show in Australia in 2015. Australia would also be holding Business week in India in January 2015. We also agreed on seeking early closure on the civil nuclear agreement, which will give Australia a chance to participate in one of the most secure and safe nuclear energy programme in the world. Cricket and hockey are natural glue between our people. I know yoga is enormously popular here. We need to connect our people more. I am pleased with the new Cultural Exchange Programme signed today. India would establish a Cultural Centre in Sydney by February 2015. We plan to hold a Festival of India in Australia in 2015 and tourism weeks in Australia.
The Social Security Agreement is a really positive development. It will help in making our business relations stronger, especially in the Services Sector.
I greatly welcome the New Framework for Security Cooperation. Security and defence are important and growing areas of the new India-Australia partnership - for advancing regional peace and stability, and combating terrorism and trans-national crimes.
This morning's visit with Prime Minister Abbott to the Australian War Memorial reminded us of the need to strive together for a better world. In conclusion, I would like to say that it has been nearly three decades since the last Prime Ministerial visit from India. The fact that we have exchanged visits in two months is a sign of better times to come.
I am deeply honoured by the opportunity to speak to the Parliament and also look forward to spending the evening at the Melbourne Cricket Ground with Prime Minister Abbott.
Thank you once again.
#DELIMITER#
17 11 2014, Australia
Business meeting with indian and australian businessmen
I would like to begin by acknowledging the traditional elders on whose land we stand today, and their ancestors, past and present.
Premier Newman,
Thank you very much for arranging this breakfast meeting with economic leaders of Queensland.
I am honoured and very encouraged by this large turnout.
Congratulations to Queensland and Brisbane for hosting such a wonderful G20. For the past few days, you have shown what a world class city you are.
Queensland's economy has been performing well, on basis of your traditional strengths in areas like tourism, resources and agriculture, but also through your investments in areas of advanced technologies and services.
This is a tribute to your leadership and to the government and business in Queensland.
I am delighted to be here for a number of reasons.
One, I have always placed great emphasis on relations between states, not just between national capitals.
Premier Newman, you and your Government are doing a lot to pursue economic opportunities with India.
You have sent a number of trade missions to India. Just this September, there was a Queensland-Gujarat Energy Roundtable in Gandhinagar, the capital of Gujarat. And, I am naturally pleased that Queensland will be participating in Vibrant Gujarat in January 2015 to showcase your infrastructure capabilities.
I know that you are not partial to Gujarat, but you are sending delegations to Kolkata and Delhi and elsewhere!
The second reason is that today, India is your fourth largest export destination. For us, Queensland is emerging as a major investment destination.
We welcome the efforts you have made to make it possible for an Australian Dollar 16 billion investment to take place in coal mining.
It will set a new standard for India-Australia cooperation and demonstrate how Australia and Queensland can be a vital partner in meeting India's requirement for energy and other vital resources.
Queensland can be an important partner in India's development – in energy, mineral resources, agriculture and food security, education and advanced technology in some areas.
We have launched a major set of reforms to boost economic growth and improve the quality of life of people.  We have set an ambitious agenda and a brisk pace.
In the area of policy:
o    We have eased foreign direct investment laws in key areas like railways, defence and insurance;
o   We have set up a commission to reform railways, which has always been seen as a just another government department – this has never been done before.
o   We have introduced labour reforms
o   We have made big changes in our policies on fuel – coal, natural gas, diesel 
In the area of processes:
o   changing the way we work as government. Good Governance is the starting point of change. It is as important to business as it is to ordinary citizens.
o   eliminating unnecessary laws and regulations, making processes easier and shorter, ensuring that our government is more transparent
o   Focus on ease of doing business
o   We are partnering with state governments and even going doing to districts and villages.
o   Digital India Campaign
o   Facilitation Cells have been set up.
In terms of institutions
o   set up a new department for skill development;
o   set up a special authority for industrial corridors
o   eBiz Portal for integrated application process – 24x7
o   Closely monitoring implementation of decisions
o   set up an Expenditure Reform Commission;
In terms of Initiatives
o   We have launched Make in India as a new mission to promote manufacturing in India.
o   creating world class infrastructure
o   100 Smart cities; Metro projects for 50 cities;  modern waste management system for 500 cities;
o   affordable healthcare within everyone's reach; sanitation for all by 2019; a roof over every head by 2022; electricity in every household;
o   Clean Energy – with special focus on solar energy; energy efficiency
o   Water conservation
o   Clean Ganga Programme , which is also a major urban renewal and environment protection programme
I see great opportunities for our cooperation. Let me highlight some of them.
Coal is already a major item of exports to India; but, I see vast potential in resources in general, as Indian industrial sector gathers momentum and grows.
We could also commence import of Liquified Natural Gas from Queensland.
You are leaders in many areas of mining and mining technologies, services and equipment, mining consultancy, mine safety, coal washeries and mine management.
 I invite you to participate in India.
We have made our policies transparent and predictable. We have made our procedures clearly defined and smooth.
Queensland can also be a partner in strengthening India's food security. We already import a fairly significant amount of fruits and vegetables and some quantities of fertilizer.
What we need is an integrated partnership –joint research to improve yield and farm productivity to development of agriculture supply chain infrastructure and food processing.  This is an area of great priority for my government.
Infrastructure , where we aim to invest over a trillion dollars over the next five years.
Queensland's strengths in advanced areas of technology also offer enormous opportunities for collaboration such as biotechnology  and your growing strengths in aviation sector
We can develop strong synergies in the area of information and communication technology and its every growing application in all areas of life and business.  I hope Indian IT companies will enjoy good access. Conversely, Digital India offers enormous opportunities.
Queensland can take justifiable pride in its success in the tourism sector. Indian investors would be willing to partner with you, as more and more Indians are drawn to the incredible beauty and hospitality of your state.
You can participate in India's ambitious plans for smart, sustainable, habitable cities to cater to its growing urban population. It is expected that nearly 11% of the world's urban population in 2025 will be in India.
You can make India a manufacturing hub, for India, for exports and for import back into Australia.
Let us foster closer cooperation in skill development and education; and, research and development.Your Universities and Research Institutions have already contributed significantly to the growing science and technology relationship between India and Australia.
This is particularly true of the collaboration between the two countries under the Australia-India Strategic Research Fund.
I know that most of you are aware of the opportunities in India and have looked at the market.
new brisbane breakfast meet
You will begin to find a difference in India.
There will no longer have to reach those opportunities through uncertain and unpredictable pathways, crossing hurdles along the way.
You will not only be able to convert opportunities into partnerships, you will do it in an environment that is welcoming and easy to do business in.
Let me conclude by saying, India-Australia relationship is comprehensive, involving economic cooperation, a growing security and strategic partnership and increasing cooperation in international forums, which are vital for peace, stability and prosperity in our region.
I am keen to hear your views. I will make sure our team here follows up on them.
I thank you all for coming here this morning and wish you a very productive day ahead. Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
16 11 2014, Australia
Civic reception
I want to acknowledge the traditional owner of the land on which we stand today and pay my respect to their elders and their past and present. Premier Campbell Newman, Lord Mayor Graham Quirk and Friends,
Thank you very much for hosting this Reception. I am delighted to be present at this function. Congratulations to Brisbane for being such a wonderful host to G20. You did an outstanding job. I know that you have often lived in the shadow of Melbourne and Sydney. This week you have shown the world what a great city and host you are.
Today, I have started my bilateral visit to Australia and, I am pleased that it has begun here. Queensland is at the forefront of relations between India and Australia.
Earlier today, I had the privilege to unveil a statue of Mahatma Gandhi in Brisbane. This has added a special bond of emotion between us. This is a symbol of the values that we share; the ideals we aspire to; and, the world we wish to build. The credit for this strong partnership between India and Queensland goes to you, Premier Newman and Lord Mayor.
Your missions to India have been very productive and brought our businesses and our people closer. Several Queensland business delegations are visiting India this year. Queensland has emerged as a major source of key resources to power India`s growth development. It is also a major destination of Indian investments. You have supported partnership in education and skills.
Queensland`s universities and research institutions are collaborating closely with India. They have used the opportunities provided by Australia-India Strategic Research Fund well.
I went to Queensland University the other day and met some of your scientists and academics. The joint research we are doing will help our farmers, especially in dry areas, and contribute to food security in India. Queensland`s fruits and vegetables are really good. There is a lot of potential for us to work together.
I am joined on this visit by a delegation of business and academic leaders from India, who are forging strong partnerships with Australia and especially with Queensland.
I am grateful to you for looking after the Indian community of nearly 100,000. Some have been here for generations, some have come more recently. But, they are really happy here. They are the bridge of friendship and understanding between us.
We can also learn and gain a lot from each other in tourism. Lord Mayor, Brisbane has emerged as centre of advanced technology; at the same time Hyderabad is also known as Cyberabad. It is natural that the two cities have a sister-city relationship. I truly welcome the engagement between states and cities. Relations between countries can prosper fully only if we bring our states and cities together.
That is why I am also very keen to involve states in India in our international engagements.
Friends, This is an exciting moment in India. A moment filled with optimism; a desire for change and progress; and the confidence to achieve it. Driven by the energy and the enterprise of our youth. This is a time to forge partnerships in India. You will find a welcoming environment that not only makes it possible, but also easy and smooth.
Here in Brisbane and at this Reception, I feel the sentiment of friendship between our people and the promise of a strong partnership in the years ahead.
I want to thank you once again for the warmth of your welcome and your hospitality.
#DELIMITER#
15 11 2014, Australia
BRICS Leaders Meeting
Your Excellency President Dilma Rousseff,
Your Excellency President Vladimir Putin,
Your Excellency President Xi Jinping,
Your Excellency President Jacob Zuma,
•I wish to join my other colleagues and congratulate President Dilma Rousseff on her re-election as the President of Brazil.
•From Brazil to Brisbane, it has been most successful journey under your leadership.
•Our group will continue to benefit from your visionary leadership.
•I would also like to thank President Rousseff for hosting today`s meeting.
•The historic 6th BRICS Summit in Fortaleza delivered - the New Development Bank and the Contingent Reserve Arrangement.
•These signal our collective capacities to create and manage global institutions.
•These can be effective in promoting sustainable development and bridge infrastructure gaps. We can be more aligned to local conditions and requirements. We should focus on next generation infrastructure.
•We can promote new models of governance and financing, while maintaining the highest banking standards. We should also make it more participatory.
•We need to work towards their early implementation.
•We propose that we should set the target of 2016 for inauguration of this Bank.
•We hope to ratify the agreement by the end of the year. We would soon nominate our candidate for the post of the Presidency.
•The Contingent Reserve Arrangement is also a very timely initiative.
•The work on the Reinsurance pool among BRICS is also a welcome one. We hope that our officials will be able to come up with a concrete proposal by the next year.
•These measures send a strong message to the rest of the world about the efficacy of BRICS.
•Besides these, we have started work on many other proposals that would deepen our relations and enhance our cooperation in all spheres.
Thank You.
#DELIMITER#
13 11 2014, Myanmar
Adress to the Indian Community
Your rights will remain the way they are. I will try to ensure that all your rights are being granted to you. I shall come again. 
As a foreigner you might have experienced the shifting perspective of the world towards you in the past few months. The manner in which the other powerful governments are looking at India, you as Indians must feel proud at being an Indian. 
But when such an opportunity arises, our responsibility also increases manifold. Earlier no one considered us to be important enough to be noticed but now every move of ours is scrutinized with utmost attention. Hence the Indian society – not just the government or the country but even the Indian communities around the world are being watched closely… we are being evaluated closely. They are trying to find a way to reach us. The ones who did not even respond to our namastes (greetings) earlier are now trying to hug us. You all must have experienced this, haven’t you? Do you see the change? Do you feel people are treating you with much more respect now? 
This is our one such prized possession which we have to protect as well as enhance. Irrespective of the country we stay in, we should constantly strive to be worthy of their love and respect, contributing our best towards their betterment and also our own. However, it shouldn’t be the case that only our neighbours prosper; you should also prosper and set new benchmarks of development and success! 
India and Myanmar are historically linked. We fought for our Independence together. And even today the people of this country treat India with reverence due to Buddha. We are constantly striving to be of use to our neighbouring nations as we feel that it is our duty. A few days back, I had made an announcement that we will build and send into orbit, a satellite that will be dedicated to SAARC. And while I am in this country, I would like to announce that the benefits of this dedicated satellite will be provided to Myanmar as well. The main benefits of this satellite will be seen in the health sector, education and long-distance education sector and tele-medicine sector. By doing this, we are also trying to think about ensuring maximum benefits for planet Earth. We have decided to shoulder a few responsibilities and announce them in the upcoming SAARC meeting that is to be held in Nepal. One of the responsibilities is ensuring the inclusion of Myanmar in the SAARC nations and try to rid the country off Polio. India is a polio-free country now. Polio cases have not been reported in the country for the past five-seven years but the disease persists in our neighbouring countries. Pakistan has reported several such cases. Whenever a member of the family suffers from Polio, the entire family is rendered crippled. This is a charitable work and we are working towards creating a plan to help our neighbouring countries rid themselves off the crippling disease. We will obviously need to procure the necessary permissions from the respective countries and we look forward to do so in the SAARC meeting where we can also discuss the plan and ensuring its effective execution. It is a charitable deed which has always been India’s USP. We have always been recognised for our charitable work towards humanity. We would constantly strive to excel and not left behind in this space which has always been our strength. India has recently launched a campaign called ‘Make In India’ where we are beckoning entrepreneurs from around the world to come to India and partake in the benefits of the industrial development. India is a country of opportunities and possibilities in addition to being the ‘youngest’ country in the world. Our workforce constitutes largely of the youth and we want to exploit this resource to touch newer heights of development. 
In three days here, I have had the opportunity to meet a lot of leaders from around the globe. My experience in this country has been very pleasant. The manner in which the government and people of this country have planned and executed this welcoming ceremony is indeed commendable. I feel sorry that I wasn’t able to spend some more time with all of you but I am really impressed with the manner in which with discipline you have made use of the limited time to the optimum. I will praise your organizational ability of the disciplined manner in which the ceremony was executed, everywhere I go. I am very thankful to you all! 
#DELIMITER#
13 11 2014, Myanmar
East Asia Submit
Your Excellency President Thein Sein, Excellencies,
Let me, at the outset, congratulate you and thank you and the people of Myanmar for the excellent arrangements and for the warm hospitality, for which this beautiful country is well known. As a neighbour, India takes great pride and delight in Myanmar’s success as the host of this event.
Since entering office six months ago my government has moved with a great sense of priority and speed to turn our ‘Look East Policy’ into ‘Act East Policy’. The East Asia Summit is an important pillar of this policy.
No other forum brings together such a large collective weight of global population, youth, economy and military strength. Nor is any other forum is so critical for peace, stability and prosperity in Asia-Pacific and the world.
Over the last eight Summits, we have made progress in a number of areas. We worked on important issues. We have begun to establish a culture and habit of dialogue and cooperation.
In the same vein, we should also start major initiatives on energy partnership, for example, in the area of solar energy, with the objective of bringing affordable clean energy within the reach of all.
Excellencies, Ebola has once again highlighted the importance of international cooperation in combating pandemics. India has made a contribution of US $ 12 million in the efforts against Ebola. We also have 251 police personnel, including 104 women personnel, as part of the UN Mission in Liberia. They have all remained on duty in Liberia.
The initiatives taken by the East Asia Summit in disaster preparedness and response are truly commendable.
Excellencies, our region has a number of complex and unresolved questions in the area of security. There is a need for a serious and sustained dialogue to strengthen the climate of understanding and confidence among all stakeholders in the region.
In a world of inter-dependence and globalization, there is no option but to follow international laws and norms. This also applies to maritime security.
For this reason, following international law and norms is important for peace and stability in South China Sea as well. This also includes the 1982 UN Convention on Law of the Sea, which should be the basis for resolving disputes peacefully. We also hope that the efforts to conclude a Code of Conduct on South China Sea by a process of consensus would be successful soon.
We also have to ensure that cyber and space remain a source of connectivity and prosperity, not new theatres for conflict.
Challenges of terrorism and extremism have increased. There is close link with drug trafficking, arms smuggling and money laundering.
We support the East Asia Summit Declaration on the Islamic State. At the same time, comprehensive response against terrorism requires a genuinely international partnership against all terrorism. Those who believe in humanity must come together. We should also reject any linkage between religion and terrorism.
Excellencies, a balanced Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement, which gives equal emphasis to goods and services, could become a springboard for regional integration and prosperity.
Excellencies, we convey our best wishes for the goal of creating an ASEAN Community in 2015. ASEAN’s success is an inspiration for broader integration in the Asia-Pacific region. India has great confidence in Asian centrality and leadership in pursuing that goal.
#DELIMITER#
12 11 2014, Myanmar
ASEAN Submit
Your Excellency, President U Thein Sein, I am grateful to you for organising this Summit and chairing the session with great statesmanship. Under your leadership, Myanmar is playing an important role in the region and it has also benefited India-ASEAN relations.
I am grateful to each of you for your views. They have further reinforced my confidence in the India-ASEAN Strategic Partnership.
Above all, like good friends, you all wish to see a successful and prosperous India.
I want to make a few points now. There are many similarities and convergences between us. India and ASEAN are second and third in terms of population. We are among the largest economies and among the three fastest growing economies in this century. Majority of us here belong to the developing world.
We have the strength and the potential of a young population. In India, 800 million people below the age of 35 years constitute a huge opportunity.
We have embarked on a new economic journey in India. We are emphasizing infrastructure, manufacturing, trade, agriculture, skill development, urban renewal, smart cities. Make in India is a new mission. We are placing as much emphasis on ease of doing business in India as we are on making policies attractive. I invite you to this new environment in India. Indian companies are also keep to invest in and trade with ASEAN.
I also assure you that there will be major improvement our trade policy and environment. We will also move ahead with connectivity projects with ASEAN with speed.
I also suggest that we conduct a review of our free trade agreement on goods to improve it further and make it beneficial to all. । also urge that the FTA on Service and Investment be brought into force at the earliest.
Many of you have spoken about the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement. It can be a springboard for economic integration and prosperity in the region. However, we should aim for a balanced Agreement, which is beneficial to all; and, is truly comprehensive in nature, by equally ambitious agenda with similar timelines for goods and services.
To deepen our connectivity, I am considering establishing, with your cooperation, a special facility or special purpose vehicle to facilitate project financing and quick implementation.
However, in this age, more than physical connectivity, we need Information Highways or i-ways. My experience is that even where road connectivity is poor, we can create vast economic opportunities and employment through i-ways.
India is prepared to provide all assistance and cooperation in this area.
ASEAN and India have large cities and are experiencing urbanization at a rapid pace. This is both a challenge and opportunity. Come and participate in building India`s 100 smart cities and renewal of 500 cities.
Science and technology and education are important areas of cooperation.
We should think ambitiously of what we can do in Renewal Energy and Energy efficiency. Let us think of a major ASEAN India Solar Project for research, manufacturing and deployment.
Space science can give us benefit in many sectors. We should quickly establish the new India-ASEAN Space-related Ground Station in Vietnam and start the project for upgrading the existing station in Indonesia.
As neighbours, India and ASEAN can gain a lot from cooperation in the disaster risk reduction, response and management. India is prepared to offer full assistance in capacity building, coordination and response in the region.
We should further enhance our cooperation in health, including traditional medicine, climate change and environment and forests.
Agriculture and food security is another area where I see great potential for cooperation, as some of you have mentioned.
We should move quickly towards mutual Recognition of Degrees. We should conduct more research and exchanges on our ancient links and how our shared heritage can be of use to the modern world.
Skill development is essential for creating employment opportunities for our youth and for our economic development. We should collaborate by sharing our respective areas expertise in skill development.
I personally lay great emphasis on people-to-people contacts. I would like to see increased contacts between students, youth, teachers, parliamentarians, diplomats, media, farmers, artists and experts.
Tourism has not grown the way it should. Today, of course, ASEAN region is the most popular destination for Indian tourists. I want to see further increase in ASEAN tourists in India. In this, the Buddhist circuit represents a vast opportunity.
Excellencies, we pay a lot of attention to economic prosperity and protecting our environment. Do we pay the same attention to the security and safety of our youth?
We have received a high level of security cooperation from ASEAN countries for which I am grateful.
But, we should further strengthen our cooperation on countering terrorism, extremism, drugs, arms, and money laundering.
Excellencies, Asia`s future is bright, but it also faces many challenges. Our progress and prosperity depends on peace and stability in the region.
There is wave of change in the world. New realities are emerging in the changed world. Globalisation is a fact of life. We are all affected by it and we have all benefited from it.
And, in this world, maritime trade and passage, and therefore, maritime security has become even more important. We all have the responsibility that we all follow international law and norms on maritime issues, as we do in the realm of air passage. In future, we will also need this in space.
For peace and stability in South China Sea, everyone should follow international norms and law. This includes the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. We also hope that you will be able to successfully implement the Guidelines to the 2002 Declaration on Conduct and that the Code of Conduct on South China Sea can be concluded soon on the basis of consensus.
Finally, I would like to say that it is a great privilege to meet all of you here. This has doubled my confidence and enthusiasm about our relations with ASEAN.
I assure you of my sustained personal attention to relations with ASEAN so that we can meet our high expectations from this relationship.
#DELIMITER#
12 11 2014, Myanmar
Indian-ASEAN Summit
I am very pleased to have the privilege to participate in the India-ASEAN Summit.
I am particularly honoured that I got this opportunity in Myanmar. Myanmar is our great neighbor, with which we have had historically very close relations. Further, India`s Eastern journey begins on the Western boundary of Myanmar.
Excellency, I am grateful to you for your warm welcome and hospitality; congratulate you on the excellent arrangements; and wish you great success in hosting the ASEAN and East Asia Summits.
My government has been in office for six months and the intensity and momentum with which we have enhanced our engagement in the East, is a reflection of the priority that we give to this region.
We have close bilateral relations with each of you and we treat the relations with ASEAN with the same importance.
Today ASEAN has established its own identity and voice in global political and economic affairs.
Today, the entire Asia-Pacific region desires integration and cooperation
To achieve this extremely important goal we look at ASEAN, not only for inspiration but also for its leadership; and you have achieved a great deal of success in leading us in that direction.
The ASEAN community is India`s neighbour. We have ancient relations of trade, religion, culture, art and traditions. We have enriched each other through our interaction.
This constitutes a strong foundation of a modern relationship.
That is why our world view is similar in many respects; our mutual confidence and trust is strong. We have no irritants in our relationship. We see encouraging opportunities and challenges in the world in similar ways.
ASEAN and India have the vigour and enthusiasm of its youth and wisdom and understanding of its ancient civilisations.
Rapidly developing India and ASEAN can be great partners for each other. We are both keen to enhance our cooperation in advancing balance, peace and stability in the region.
We have been successful to a considerable extent in pursuing our dreams. We have laid a foundation for a strong and comprehensive strategic partnership.
But, our potential is much higher than where we are at the moment.
A new era of economic development, industrialization and trade has begun in India. Externally, India`s `Look East Policy` has become `Act East Policy`.
We greatly respect the enthusiasm with which you have extended the hand of friendship to India. Today the world and the region need a strong India-ASEAN partnership;
That is why we believe that we are entering in a new era in the India-ASEAN partnership.
I look forward keenly to hear your views.
But before I end, I want to thank His Majesty Sultan Hassan-al Bolkiah of Brunei for injecting so much energy in India-ASEAN relationship as country-coordinator. I am also confident that Vietnam, as the next country-coordinator, will take our relationship to an even higher plane.
#DELIMITER#
9 11 2014, India
World Ayurveda conference
My colleague and Cabinet Minister Dr. Harshvardhan ji, all the respected members sharing the stage and gathering dedicated to Ayurveda!
It was being announced that a brainstorm-churning has happened here for three days and elixir of life has been found. So I have also come to take this elixir so that few drops would come in my fate and I don’t know whether I would get it a full pitcher or not. This time the theme is something like “Health Challenges and Ayurveda”. Isn’t it? You must have discussed on a variety of points but to me the biggest challenges are WE, the people attached to Ayurveda. It is hard to find Ayurveda-doctor who is 100% dedicated to it. Even they realise that they can’t make it through this path and that they have to take the path to Allopathy. So they ask patients to start with Allopathic medicines for first three days and Ayuvedic treatment can be taken care of in successive stages. I feel this mentality is the extraordinary challenge against Ayurveda. If these persons practising Ayurveda would not be committed, devoted and confident then how those patients would trust them?
When I was a kid, there was a joke in circulation that a traveller went to a city. He visited a restaurant and asked to see the owner. He was told that the owner has gone to take a meal in a restaurant across the road. Now think who would like to eat in such restaurant? They can’t win the trust of others, who don’t believe in themselves and their traditions. Crisis is not of the “Ayurveda”, but its practitioners. I don’t know how do you take this discussion, in a pleasant or bitter way? But if it is bitter, then I think that I am referring the matter exactly according to the norms of Ayurveda because in Ayurveda what tastes bitter at first turns sweet ultimately.
I have been meeting many people and talking to them. Last time when I was Chief Minister of Gujarat, I had called meeting of specialists of Ayurveda. This was not my domain at that time and I was working within state of Gujarat, but there was a need of awareness about Ayurveda. Ayurveda is not a field to be limited to a certified doctor. Our ancestors have made health, a part of our life. Today we have outsourced our health and lifestyle. Those days, health was not outsourced. It was part of lifestyle and due to that every person, every family was aware about wellness of body. If any problem would pop up, then what could be possible solutions, people were conscious about that too. Even today you must be feeling that experience.
At times when you are travelling in a train or bus and suppose a baby is crying a lot, you must have observed that 12-15 persons would come there and they would provide a variety of suggestive measures. One would say to give a dose of something, another would suggest some different dosage and third would even take out some packet asking to give a dose of that. We don’t even ask who that person was, whether he was a doctor or not. But when he assures us, we believe him that by giving that dose would bring relief to her as the baby is in pain and crying and he might have a solution to this. We see these very often in course of our journey in a train or bus that if a co-passenger falls sick then one or other passenger would come over and treat him, even when he or she is not a designated doctor or specialist in Ayurveda, nor a graduate in Ayurveda from Jamnagar University. But because this has been a natural practise in India and a habit incubated under traditions, we have some knowledge of it. Gradually we outsourced the complete health sector. If any medical problem crops up, we have to take advice and consultation and we have to go according to prescription. If that treatment is successful then it alright otherwise we go to other practitioner…we change the consultancy.
The first and only necessity for the solution of this problem is that we should not compromise our core sector, let me be a student of Ayurveda, a teacher of Ayurveda or engaged in manufacturing of Ayurveda medicine or a promoter of holistic healthcare. We should be 100% committed to what we do, only then we will start seeing the results. Some negative circumstances have been encountered, due to which tired and desperate people are traversing back to the basics in the name of “Holistic health care”. They are feeling that modern era medical science might give instant relief but it doesn’t guarantee a healthy body as a whole. If at all we want the assurances of health, we would have to choose holistic approach. Be it naturopathy, Ayurveda, strict diet-control method or homeopathy; there is always a way in that direction and perhaps that is why Ayurveda is known to us as “Panchamveda”. It has been valued and nurtured as such. There is not a part from the root to the fruit of a tree in nature which doesn’t find a valuable position in Ayurveda. From the root to the fruit is a great deal and it means our ancestors must have had a microscopic study of attributes, its nature, its utility in practice. And after all those extraneous work they would have reached the miraculous position. How do we keep that great resource in modern times is the second challenge to us. It is not possible for us to wait for this world to learn Sanskrit language and then accept the preparative. But the least we could do is to translate the exalted resource in the language this world understands. So the workforce engaged in this industry should be motivated to do the research in the area with a time limit under an institutional framework and present all the research works.
Third point is regarding research articles published in science magazines all over the world. Can’t we altogether launch a movement and try to put some pressure and also encourage people involved in this sector to publish a research article in every Ayurvedic session…make them a part of curriculum. One should be made to write an essay or article in modern terminologies with a profound study on a subject for once at the interval of every two year if he or she is a professor and in case of a student, in the final year of their education . And it should be published in international magazines or we should better say that 10% of all the space in the magazines of international medicine should be dedicated to Ayurveda. We would have our research articles at par though differently. If we could find a place for our research articles in at international forum then world working on medical science would notice it. If we would dedicate 20% of our work and 20% of spaces would be dedicated to Ayurvedic research articles then the world reading modern medical science would notice it eventually, and may be this would change the perspective of modern medical scientists in a positive way. I feel this might crystallize into a new stimulant to give new directions to Ayurveda.
But for this there should be a proper follow-up and identification of medical science magazines available globally. We also need to find out if among all those magazines whether or not Ayurveda has a place. And if Ayurveda is to given some space right there, then someone would have to discuss this and keep following it up with the concerned. In a sense we have to launch a movement that where there is a global acceptance, how we carve a niche for us there. Till a matter doesn’t reach to us via America, we don’t usually accept the same, and it’s become a human tendency and in particular a feature of our fellow countrymen after 1200 yearlong slavery it has penetrated deep into our veins. So if an article is published in an international magazine then rest assured that the Ayurvedic doctor would adorn his drawing room wall with his photo frame. I don’t know if people associated with Ayurveda have studied these or not. When Pundit Nehru was the Prime Minister, then these matters were dealt with differently in those social conditions. Government then looked for an approach to promote Ayurveda on grounds that why such a massive stream of ours is getting destroyed. Then a Hathi commission was constituted. There was a Cabinet minister named Jai Sukhlal Hathi and commission was assigned a task to come up with suggestive measures to rejuvenate and promote Ayurveda. It’s perhaps a report of year 1960 and quite a marvellous one. In that report there is an interesting suggestion on the first page itself. In that, it’s been said that there is a need to change the packaging, because that packet…all those herbs is to be taken a bag full…get the same boiled, re-boil with two litres of water, and the next time it is to be halved…then keep it overnight…boil again to reduce it to half. These practises were not swallowed by common people. He further writes that it needs to be packaged as such that common people find it easy to use. Gradually there has been some change. Today people opting Ayurvedic medicine don’t face such challenges of taking the herbs back home, boiling them and then make use of it. Now they find it readymade, in medicinal forms, in tablet forms and likewise. That mean these are available in all the forms at par with an allopathic medicine. We are in need of such developmental changes.
So there should be joint efforts in a year to two consisting of researchers, students and manufacturers in Ayurvedic field and not for doctors to prescribe the medicine manufactured for some specific company. Please understand the point I am referring to and inculcate it. It should be ensure how the production of medicine can be improved. Likewise, whether the herbs we have studied in Vedic texts are available and this is a field of intense research. There would be many medicines written in Vedic texts that would prescribe a root of a specific tree or plant to be used for medicinal purposes. Today it would seem difficult to find those trees and plants if searched in accordance with the description illustrated in those texts. I have this experience because when I was the Chief Minister of Gujarat, I had ordered to construct a “Teerthankar-forest” for all the 24 teerthankars as they got their enlightenment under some or other tree. So I thought constructing a “Teerthankar-forest” and plant those 24 trees right there in that forest. When I started searching for the trees, I was shocked. I went as far as Indonesia to find those trees but couldn’t find them all. It means one of the biggest challenges before us is the basic of Ayurveda, which is Herbal Plantation. How do we proceed in that direction and how do we plan a movement in that field?
If you get an opportunity to visit Bhavnagar, then also visit Palitana Jain shrine. There we have built a “Pavak-Van”, back then when I was in Gujarat. It’s situated at the base, right before the elevation of Palitana. That garden landscape is built in shape of a human body. Its extent is vast enough almost 200 meters in length. Relevant plants and trees have been planted in accordance to the parts of human body which is treated by that particular type of herb. If it’s the heart, then the trees related to the cure of heart diseases have been planted there. If it’s the problem and pains related to knee, then herbal plants and trees related to the cure has been planted at the place of knee in the garden. If a person visits that garden, he would easily identify the relevant herb and that the medicament from that very herb would help me in cure of a disease related to this very part of my body. The purpose to be fulfilled is an easy behaviour to describe an ancient knowledge in modern perspectives. Later when students tour the places, they also learn about the particulars of diseases and its curative medicinal plants. If we see the things around us, we learn faster.
According to our Shastras also, India is a country where crore of God-forms have been excogitated, and here we have devotee for each type of God. If the devotee is a wrestler, then the God is Hanuman and if the devout are adorer of money, then the Goddess is Lakshmi. If the devotee is interested in knowledge, then the Goddess is Saraswati. So here the state of affairs is as many Gods as the number of devotees. So let’s keep one thing in mind, the number of God being worshipped in our country, each one of them has a tree associated. Observe how marvellous the environment friendly society was and the imagination of such environment friendly society. There is no form of the God which is not associated with a tree or plant, and a bird or animal…we don’t have any God as such. These were the ways to broadcast the knowledge with ease. On these ways only, Ayurveda was a part of common people. We can change the things around if we have devotion like that. That’s why people trust Ayurveda, however educated they are and if the body is to be purified internally, Ayurveda is the best way to go. This is a perception amongst almost everyone. They accept that if internal cleansing is to be done, then take a shelter of Ayurveda and it would be achieved quickly.
But many a times Ayurveda is mocked also. Once, a guest was invited in a family of Ayurveda practitioner. The lady of the house asked her husband to bring some vegetables from the market place for the guest. The practitioner husband went to market to buy vegetables. He returned with leaves of Neem tree. When the wife asked reasons, he said that he had gone to market. When he saw potatoes, he thought of illness related to the consumption of same. He saw brinjals, again he realised some diseases related to them. Then he realised he is not looking at vegetables, but the diseases themselves all around. And at last, he returned with Neem leaves. So at times we have to search a practical application of knowledge. If there is no practical approach to the knowledge, it gets ditched in the interstices of time. That is the reason that the focal area for us should be to develop an accepted and easy norm.
I acknowledge that a great deal of time has passed around the world and since last 50 years Allopathy has captured the medicinal world. But people frustrated with Allopathy have turned towards holistic health care. All the institutions of the world are talking about food grain repertory and health funds and medical science is seeing itself in a new form. We have this inheritance. But it is important to see this inheritance in modern perspective. If a change is required then we ought to change it. And if we can achieve this then we would respond aptly to the challenges posed to us which could develop the trust factor in people. Lifestyle has been associated with Ayurveda. In many ways Ayurveda is connected to a way of life. Perhaps we never thought of this. Today few people sitting around here are clapping also. At the back, there are many students. Their mind must be deliberating… how will I make my career, how these small packets of herbs would help me going around with my professional life. This must be dwelling in their minds. After they go back from this discussion, then also this confusion won’t fade away, given that now we could not become a doctor, but becoming a Vaidyaraj- an Ayurveda practitioner. But something needs be done to run a life. In spite of that, I would suggest that there is no reason for them to be disheartened. I am saying this especially to this new generation. We have examples and we can learn from those examples.
Even in our country which is the genesis of Yoga, the India which imparted knowledge of Yoga to the world, we had assumed that yoga is no more of our use. This is a project for sages in caves of the Himalayas who sit and meditate. And in a way common people kept themselves aloof from it. Does anyone imagine that how yoga has become a point of central discussion all over the world, keeping in mind the state of yoga 30 years back? What is the reason that big multinational companies have a space for a Stress management institute in their company in the same way as keep CEOs? Why? The moments of crisis brought about by reasons of frustration and depression leads a person to search a way for an eternal peace and for them Yoga comes as a reliever…as a rescue. I have tried so many ways; I tried even drugs, but could find any satisfaction. Now if I traverse back to this path, I would find the specific. Even though we had detached ourselves from The Yoga, the world now is connected to it, then the Ayurveda to which we are acting indifferent today, may be tomorrow the world would get connected to it too. We have a live example here. We can sprout the faith in common man about Ayurveda only after we have confidence of this stature. So if we try for this and I am confident it would certainly be helpful.
Even today, the exported herbal medicines are prescribed all over the world as additional food supplements due to hindrance in the laws of herbal medicines. It is sent in the name of additional food supplements. It has not been accepted as a prescribed medicinal form. Do you know the powers of these pharmaceutical companies? They would not let you enter so easily in the market. They would not provide certification of global acceptance norms for these medicines. The challenge is arduous, but if common man starts to believe in it then nobody can stop you, however huge the organization is.
I am looking at yet another problem. Blessed be Ayurveda and it should do well. But what is is we have created a contrasting relationship between Ayurveda and Allopathy. Such is our complete Terminology and these terminologies need to be changed. Even we argue that Ayurveda is what cures a disease from its root, Allopathy provides only superficial relief and we follow the same. We say that Allopathy is a path, whereas Ayurveda is a lifestyle. We should focus on changing the emphasis of Ayurveda. It would not be beneficial for us if we take a contrarian view of Allopathyy. Our benefit is in the fact that as yoga has carved a niche for itself, Ayurveda too can do so. If a new disease comes in picture, then Allopathy would take care of it. But if new disease doesn’t show up then only Ayurveda can handle that. And this is a belief of all common man that this is the solution. You see, how so ever famous a doctor or surgeon be, in case of loose motion at the advent of sprouting of teeth to grandchildren, they take the kids to a Homeopath doctor. He takes the kids for medicines so that when teeth come, they don’t suffer with loose motion… do you agree with me. For the wellbeing of their kids, they leave their way of treatment. This faith is too big a thing.
I am very well versed with an event. There was a doctor named Vanikar, where I lived in Gujarat. Now he is no more now. He was very famous, perhaps first M.S. in Pathology from Gujarat and had studied abroad. He used to run a pathology laboratory. Once in his family relations, a kid got severely ill. He was infant aged approximately 2-3 months old. Time passed but there was no sign of improvement. He was taken to a Vaidyaraj- an Ayurveda practitioner. Whole family was there and many people from pathology world were also present. When they got tired of their trials, the kid was taken to Vaidyaraj. I had known that practitioner. He examined the kid and asked his wife to bring some sweet halwa. Then these men requested the Vaidyaraj that they had their breakfast, so did not want to eat halwa. Vaidyaraj replied that he was not asking halwa for them but for the kid. But the question was that the infant was of 3 months, how can he eat halwa? But whatever the herbs to be mixed must have been known to the wife, so she brought a spoonful halwa and Vaidyaraj himself fed the halwa to baby from his fingers. Almost after half an hour of effort, little by little some amount of it was fed. Within three days the infant started showing improvement. These doctors would tell me that we being a big name in the field of Allopathyy, but we couldn’t treat own own grandson. This Vaidyaraj amazed me by a spoonful of medicinal halwa. The moral of this story is there is certainly some power in this knowledge. The problem is of our faith. Once we start believing, this strength will multiply four-fold and this world would accept it as a way of life and because of it from health point of view for a healthy society and secondly the biggest advantage is that it is one of the cheapest medicines it is not at all costly. Nowadays, I am engaged in giving speeches at elections and it hurts my throat. I receive hundreds of calls suggesting me to take some turmeric. Now those people don’t know what effects does turmeric has. But when they know that there is sore throat, they know turmeric powder can be taken and I can continue delivering speeches. Such a simple and easy mechanism had developed in our society, we need to revitalise it.
I understand that in these 2-3 days of discussion many of such points must have caught your attention. On that basis formulate a plan. I would certainly cooperate in such ambitious projects as the Government of India and my support would always be there with you. I wish you all a healthy life, because doctors need to be healthy to treat patients. Secondly, I request you all to take up Ayurveda with sense of devotion only, not only on grounds of a profession. It is for the wellbeing of a society at large and for a great leap of developmental changes. March forward with this faith in you. I am blessed to have shared the space with you. This occasion is coming to a close.
I wish you all the best. Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
8 11 2014, India
Swachh Bharat abhiyan at assi ghat, varanasi
Today I have started the programme of cleaning the ghats. The social organizations of this place have assured me that the ghat will be cleaned within a month. After many years, I understand that this gift of cleanliness would be a unique one. Today, I have started and carried forward this task of cleaning the ghats in my constituency of Varanasi. I will nominate 9 people. As per our programme, after cleaning the ghats each person will nominate nine other persons. When I started the cleanliness drive in Delhi I had nominated nine people. Today again I will nominate nine people specially associated with Uttar Pradesh. 
One is the Chief Minister of UP Shri Akhilesh ji Yadav. 
The Chancellor of The Handicapped University in Chitrakoot, Jagat Guru Swami Rambhadracharya ji. 
One of the famous Bhojpuri singer and also our MP from BJP who is also associated with this place Shri Manoj Tiwari ji. 
The one to earn his place in the literary world by writing the biography of Lord Krishna, respected Manu Sharma ji. 
Cricketer and an inspiration for the youth Shri Mohammad Kaif. 
Padmashree awardee and renowned Sanskrit scholar, Guru Devi Prasad Dwivedi ji. 
A gift from UP who has created a name for himself by his comedies, Sri Raju Srivastava ji. 
The present cricketing icon of the new generation, Sri Suresh Raina ji. 
Renowned singer with a distinct identity for his music and a son of Meerut, a singer well acclaimed, Sri Kailash Kher ji. 
I have nominated these nine people. I request them to take this cleanliness drive forward and they also nominate nine people under them and take this cycle ahead. Thank you very much to you all. 
#DELIMITER#
7 11 2014, India
Saansad Adarsh Gram event, Varanasi
Minister from UP government Sri Ahmad Hussain ji, the local representative from the area Sri Surendra Singh ji, our MLC Sri Kedar Nath Singh ji, respected sister Durga Devi ji, Sri Arvind ji and my dear brothers and sisters who have gathered here in large numbers. 
The government of India has envisioned a new programme - The Saansad Aadarsh Graam Project. I, being a parliamentarian need to take responsibility of a village under this plan too. I have been reading different versions in the newspapers about my decision to adopt Jayapur village for this plan. Each one gives some version and this baffles me. I am surprised at how some fertile brains are working to spread stories about my decision to adopt this specific village. Such reasons given are ones that even I am not aware of. Why I chose this village has a very simple reason and the reason is that when Bhartiya Janta Party chose me to contest elections from Banaras, that time a big tragedy occurred where 5 people lost their lives in a fire in Jayapur. The first ever name that I became aware of after being selected for the Banaras constituency was that of Jayapur. That too I heard in a moment of crisis. Though I was neither the MP nor we had a government here, I called up the government officials, I called up my party workers and asked them to reach here for help. So this is the reason Jayapur occupied a place in my mind and my heart. So our relationship started in a moment of crisis and those relationships that spring from crisis often last a lifetime. So this is the reason for my association with Jayapur. I consider this as a fortunate association. Rest all the stories being spread are false and they have no basis. None that I am aware of. 
Now some people are writing that the Prime Minster is adopting a village. Well, this scheme is such where it is the other way round i.e. the villages are adopting a parliamentarian. Whatever position we may hold, either that of Minister, Chief Minister or even a Prime Minister, nothing can be compared to the learning that we can receive from the villagers. If I intend to become a good people’s representative, if as a public representative I want to understand people and their problems, learn something worthwhile then I cannot do so by sitting with clerks and officers. I can gather this knowledge only by interactions with the learned and experienced people of the village. They might not have been to school or had college education but what they have is a vast store of knowledge and experience. They have such a vast body of experience that they know practical ways of resolving issues, which can be a great learning experience for the public representative. This is why I have chosen Jayapur and I request you to adopt me in return and teach me ways to resolve your issues. Even after so many years of Independence our villages remained where they were then. Why so? It is now your turn to say that for the past 60 years you sat in your offices at Lucknow and Delhi and made endless policies and spent millions to no avail. Now listen to us and do what we think is better for us. 
I am also witnessing that the villages are competing to be adopted for this scheme. They are expecting the Parliamentarian to choose their village for adoption. The reason for this is a misconception among the villagers that if the parliamentarian adopts their village, a lot of money is going to flow in. Well this scheme has no money. This scheme does not involve money for if there is money, and then there will definitely be a corrupt person to pocket that money. The reason for launching this scheme was that despite running several schemes and spending lots of money, there was no change in lives of the villagers. The idea of this scheme is to find answers to these very questions. 
A few days back I invited the senior bureaucrats for tea during Diwali. These are those top notch officials who practically run the country. All of them are so highly placed that a common citizen cannot possibly approach them. I called them and gave them a job. I asked them to visit the place of their first posting. That very place where they must have been posted for around a year, where they started their careers and received their initial training. I asked them to revisit those places with their children and families. Tell them how you started as a fresher, how you functioned out of your first office and try and remember those people who helped you. Take your families to meet your acquaintances there. I asked them to spend at least three days in that very same location. And think how far they have reached in these 30-40 years whereas the village you started in remained where it was. Go and see for yourself and show the same to your family also. I want to create sensitivity, something that invokes some kind of proactive thought, where they think that it is their responsibility to bring to the forefront all those who supported them when they were new. The public representatives need to think to bring development to all those who have been instrumental in bringing them onto the national political scene. Hence it is my vision to go among these very people, work along with them and see that the government policies designed for them are fully implemented. See if there is the desired change in the village. If there is a difficulty in launching these programmes, then whatever policy level changes need to be made can be decided. If the MP is successful in achieving this, then the entire machinery of the government will get accustomed to working for people. 
I want to create an environment where the residents of Jayapur feel empowered about taking a decision for their well being. I have been seeing that Jayapur is in limelight these days a lot. Many government officials have visited the place. The village was cleaned, roads repaired. On asking why these special efforts are being made, it was the preparation for Modi ji’s visit. The villagers held the view that if Modi ji visits the village frequently it will become very clean. Are you correct in thinking this way? Now that the village has been cleaned, I would appreciate that you take a call that now all of us work together to keep the village clean. Isn’t this the beginning of an ideal village? I want you to think about the oldest tree in the village. Have you ever spared it a thought? Has the village school master ever thought of taking his students to that tree and tell them about its age, that it is some 150-200 years old, that generations from grandparents to parents to these children have played under this tree? This will foster a bonding with that tree. Today no village might know about its oldest tree. Why is this so? Are we no longer fond of them? Do we think about the elders of the village, how many are above 100 years of age, how many are above 75 years or more? How many children of the village sit with these elders and talk about the old days, about the childhood of their elders. How was their school, how were their teachers, what were the food habits at that time, how did they cope with the changing seasons. Have you ever tried this? Sadly, the closed and family like environment so common in a village scenario has suddenly started shrinking. Can we work together to bring back this environment? 
Let me ask you. Do you know the day when your village was established? There must be a day when this village came into existence. If you do not know then go to the government offices and find out when this village found existence in government records. If no record exists then decide upon a day which would be celebrated as the day when this village was born, like we celebrate our birthday. All those who have left the village in order to earn their living will also come back that day. All the senior people of the village who have attained 75, 80 or 90 years should be honoured. Tell me, on such a day, will you not clean the village? Will there be change in the mindsets or not? If someone from the village has gone out, and one day if he returns, on finding the school fan missing, he will donate one? 
How do we make our village an ideal one, not with the help of the government, but by awakening the collective strength of the society. We will decide that no child in the village would eat without first washing their hands. Tell me, do we need the government for this kind of a job. I was reading a report about a neighboring country where 40 out of 100 children die because of diseases related to not washing hands. Means 40 children out of hundred died because they did not wash hands. How much do we love our children? If the kids fall sick everyone feels sad. So let us all decide that no child from this village will ever eat anything without first washing his hands. You will not expect a prime minister to be talking about these issues. There must be some mistake. Well our leaders in the past were so accustomed of talking tall, that it never changed the ground realities. I am not here to talk big. I have to achieve a larger goal by these small targets. 
I want to ask the people of this village, some must have passed 10th, some must have passed 12th grade, some might be graduates, people of different age groups like 50 or 60 years old- have you ever been to the school where your child goes to study? Have you seen the school? Do you check if the teacher comes or not? Is the drinking water clean or dirty, if there is a toilet or a library in the school, if the computers in the school are in a working condition or not. Have we ever taken an interest in these issues? What we have done is admitted our children in school, dumped our child there at the mercy of the teacher and left him to his fate. This attitude doesn’t work. We have to be more proactive. We can decide to make a committee of the members of one neighborhood who will go each day and supervise the functioning of the school. Tell me then, our school, however small it might be, will truly turn into a temple of learning or not. It is such an easy job. 
I often tell the poor families in the villages to celebrate the birth of the girl child. But do we really celebrate the birth of a girl. Some families often end up feeling sad if a girl child is born. The daughter in law of the household has to face everybody’s ire. Will our Jayapur village celebrate the birth of a girl child? The goddess of wealth enters our household, so this should be celebrated or not, should we not be equally proud of our daughters. See, how few girls are being born in comparison to the number of boys. The reason of this is that the daughters are killed in the womb itself. If we kill the girl child in the womb itself so how will the social cycle function. If 1000 boys are born and only 800 girls are there, 200 boys will remain unmarried. What then will happen to our villages, our society? And is this the job of the government? Isn’t this our responsibility as a society to protect and honour our women? That is why I am here today, in Jayapur. We have decided whatever we were doing is past, now we have to think of a new way forward. I even say this that if you have a farm or a small piece of land, sow five plants when your daughter is born to celebrate the occasion. The girl will grow up and so will the trees. When she is old enough to get married, sell those trees and you will get the money to marry her off. 
We have to work together to develop new social structure. When the village celebrates its inception day, there will be no room for casteism. All will live in unity, casteism will not survive and once free of this social ill, no one can stop you from being a force so strong beyond everyone’s imagination. Hence this entire Aadarsh Gram Yojana involves implementing government schemes properly, on time and effectively. We have to implement it in a fashion that optimum results are obtained. The MP will provide necessary guidance and the work will gather momentum. Once the government officers realize how the work is to be done in the village, others too will follow soon. 
I have an intense desire to do many things for this village and the district of Banaras which are now under my responsibility. But I do not intend to work in the usual format of the governmental set up utilizing the funds of the government treasury. I want to use the people’s power by encouraging people’s participation. 
A while back our Village Pradhan, Durga Devi ji was giving her speech. I asked her about her qualification? She informed that she had studied till the eighth standard. Now see, how high was her confidence level because of her education. I felt proud; I was truly impressed by the manner in which she expressed her views. Don’t we want our daughters to be educated? If our Pradhan is educated, so shall be all the daughters of this village. 
Why is it so, that even for taking polio drops someone from the government office has to come to call us? Shouldn’t the youth of the village take the responsibility to see that all children receive polio drops, that no child should be inflicted by polio, that there is no one who is handicapped? The government can bring you the polio drops but it is your responsibility to see that the children receive it. So we will take this responsibility, won’t we? 
I have spent time with you, interacted with party workers and officials to understand your problems. I am confident that people in the administration which is primarily being run by the state government, will see to it that the tasks are undertaken and duly taken to their culmination. What the government needs to do and what as villagers we need to do… we will decide now. And I repeat, the MP will not adopt the village, rather the village has to adopt the MP. We have to work in a new direction and create an ideal village. I am grateful to the people of Jayapur. Naturally if I have made inquiries about the works being done, the organizational functioning, then I will try to find new ways too. But I do not wish to discuss this on the stage here. I will raise these issues at the necessary forums. At the same time I expect you people to sit together and decide what works you can undertake and to work on your own collective strengths. 
I have heard that there is a water crisis in this village. The government will do what it needs to do. But let us decide that we will not allow even a single drop of rainwater to go waste. There will no longer be water crisis. But all of us have to work together for this. Whatever we have been doing is past. Now we have to think of a new way forward. We have to march ahead with our social strength. We will no longer wait for the government to do something for us. We will work together as a force and involve our neighbouring villages too. I have seen this happening in some villages. The people have done it and so will Jayapur do it. 
I express my gratitude for the love and respect showered by you and I want to assure you that we will work together as a team to create a new Jayapur, a better Jayapur. 
With this belief in my heart, I express my sincere gratitude to you all. Thank You! 
#DELIMITER#
2 11 2014, India
Mann ki Baat
My dear fellow countrymen, 
I am with you again almost after a month. A month is quite a long time. Lots of things keep happening in the world. You all have recently celebrated the festival of Diwali with great fervour and joy. It is these festivals which bring happiness in our daily lives from time to time. Be it poor or rich, people from village or from urban areas, festivals hold a different significance in everyone’s lives. This is my first meeting after Diwali, so I convey my very warm wishes to you all. 
Last time we had some general conversation. But then I came to some new realizations after that conversation. Sometimes we think leave it... nothing is going to change, people are indifferent, they will not do anything, our country is like this. From my last conversation in Mann Ki Baat to this one, I would urge you all to change this mindset. Neither is our country is like this nor our people indifferent. Sometimes I feel the Nation is way ahead and the government is lacking behind. And from my personal experience I will say that the governments too needs to change their mindsets. And I say that because I can see tremendous sense of commitment in the Indian youth. They are very eager to do their bit and are just seeking an opportunity where they can do their bit. And they are making efforts at their own end. Last time I had asked them to buy at least one khadi outfit. I had not asked anyone to be Khadidhari, But the feedback I got from Khadi stores was that in a week’s time the sales had jumped up by 125%. In this way, as compared to last year the sales this year is more than double in the week following 2nd Oct. This means, the people of our country is many times more than we think of. I salute all my fellow Indians. 
Cleanliness……….. Can anyone imagine that cleanliness will become a such a huge public movement. The expectations are high and they should be so. I can see some good results, cleanliness can now be witnessed in two parts. One is those huge garbage piles which keep lying in the city; well the people in the government will work to remove those. It is a big challenge but you cannot run away from your responsibilities. All state governments and all municipalities will now have to take concrete actions due to the rising public pressure. Media is playing a very positive role in this. But there is the second aspect which gives me immense pleasure, happiness and a sense of satisfaction that the general public has started feeling that leave what happened in the past, now they will not dirty their surroundings. We will not add to the existing dirt. A gentleman Mr Bharat Gupta has sent me a mail on mygov.in from Satna, Madhya Pradesh. He has related his personal experience during his tour of the railways. He said that people eat on trains and usually litter around. He continues to say that he has been touring from the past many years but it is this time around no one was littering, rather they were looking for dustbins to throw their trash. When they could not see any arrangements they collected all their litter in a corner. He says that it was a very gratifying experience for me. I thank Bharat ji for sharing this experience with me. 
What I am seeing is that this campaign has had a great influence on kids. Many families mention that now whenever kids eat a chocolate they themselves pick the wrapper and disposes it. I was seeing a message on the social media. Someone had posted a picture with the Title “My hero of the Day”. This picture was that of a little kid who, picks up trash, wherever he goes, even when going to school. He is himself motivated to do this. Just see…people now feel it is their country and they will not make it dirty. We will not add to the existing dirt pile. And those do litter feel ashamed for someone is around to point it out to them. I consider all these to be good omens. 
Another thing is that many people come to meet me who are from all the sections of the society. They can be government officers, from film world, sports world, industrialists, scientists ……. All of them, whenever they interact with me, in ten minutes discussion, about four to five minutes the discussion is on social issues. Someone talks about cleanliness, while some others talk about education, while someone talks about social reforms. Some people discuss the ruining of family life. I initially thought if a businessman comes, he will definitely talk of things of his personal interest. But I am seeing a major change. 
They talk less about their interest and more about taking on some or the other social responsibility. When I add up all these small incidents I see a larger picture and I realize that we are moving in the right direction. It is true that unhealthy environment leads to diseases and sickness, but where does sickness strike first. It first strikes the poor household. When we work towards cleanliness, we make a major effort in the direction of helping the poor. If the poor families are saved from diseases, then they will be saved from a lot of financial problems. If a person is healthy, then he will work hard, earn for the family and help in running the family smoothly. And so this cleanliness drive is directly related to the health and welfare of my poor brethren. We may not be able to do something to help the poor, but even keeping the environs clean helps the poor in a big way. Let us view it from this perspective; it will be very beneficial. 
I receive different kinds of letters. Last time I had mentioned about our specially abled children. Whom God has given some kind of deficiencies; I had expressed my feelings regarding those people. I see that people who work in this field are sending me their success stories. But I came to know about two things from my people in the government. The people from the HRD ministry after hearing my talk, felt the need to do something. And the officers came together to work out an action plan. This is an example of how changes are coming about in governance. One they have decided that those specially abled who want to pursue technical education, a thousand of them who are good will be selected for Special Scholarships, and a plan has been made. I congratulate the officials who could think in those lines. Another important decision is that all the Kendriya Vidyalaya’s and all Central Universities will have a special infrastructure for the specially abled, for example if they can’t climb stairs then there will be provision for ramps to facilitate movement by wheel chair. They need different kinds of toilets. The HRD ministry has decided to allocate an additional Lakh rupees to the Kendriya Vidyalays and Central universities. This fund will be used by these institutions to create infrastructure for the specially abled. This is an auspicious beginning……………these things will lead us to change. 
I had the chance to visit Siachin a few days back. I spent Diwali with the Jawans who are ready to lay down their lives for the nation. When the nation was celebrating Diwali I was at Siachin. It is because of them that we were able to celebrate Diwali, so I wanted to be with them. I experienced the difficulties in which they spent their time there. I salute all my Jawans. But I want to share another matter of great pride with you. Our Jawans work in the field of security. In calamities, they risk their lives to save our life. They also fetch medals for us in sporting events. You will be glad to know that these Jawans have won a gold medal in a very prestigious event in Britain called Cambrian Patrol, defeating contestants from 140 nations. I offer these Jawans my heartiest congratulations. 
I also got an opportunity to meet, the young and dynamic students, boys and girls over tea who had won medals in Sports. They give me renewed energy. I was seeing their zeal and enthusiasm. The facilities in our country are quite less as compared to other nations, but instead of complaining they were just sharing their joy and excitement. For me, this tea programme for these players was very inspiring, and I felt really good. 
I would like to tell you something more and that too from my heart. I truly believe that people of my country trust my words and my intentions. But, today one more time, I want to reiterate my commitment. As far as black money is concerned, my people, please trust your Prime Servant, for me this is the Article of Faith. This is my commitment that the hard-earned money of the poor people stashed abroad, every penny of that should be brought back. The ways and means to be followed can be different. And this is very obvious in a democratic country, but on the basis of as much I understand and as much I know, I assure you that we are on the right track. Today, nobody, neither me, nor the government, nor you, nor even the previous government knew how much money is stashed abroad. Everyone gives estimate calculated in his/her own way. I don’t want to get lost in some such figures and estimates, Its my commitment that, be it 2 rupees, or 5 rupees, or millions or even billions, this is the hard-earned money of the poor people of my country and it has to come back. And I assure you that I will keep trying till the end. No efforts will be spared. I want your blessings to be always with me. I assure you that I will do whatever and whenever something is required to be done for you. I give my commitment to you. 
I have received a letter. It has been sent by Sri Abhishek Pareekh. The same sentiments were expressed to me by many mothers and sisters when I was not even the Prime Minister. Some doctor friends had also expressed their concern and I too have expressed my views on this issue a number of times in the past. Mr. Parikh has drawn my attention towards the increase of drug addiction that is fast catching up with our young generation. He has asked me to discuss this topic in “Mann ki Baat.” I agree with his concern and I will definitely include this topic, in my next edition of Mann Ki Baat. I will discuss the topic of drugs, drug addiction and drug mafia and how they are a threat to our country’s youth. If you have some experience, any information in this regard, if you have ever rescued any child from this drug addiction, if you know of any ways and means to help, if any government official has played a good role, if you give me any such information, I will convey such efforts to the public and together we will try to create an environment in each family that no child ever thinks of choosing this vice out of sheer frustration. I will definitely discuss this in detail in the next edition. 
I know I am choosing those topics which put the government in the dock. But how long will we keep these things hiding? How long will we brush these important concerns under the carpet? Some day or the other we need to take a call, follow our instincts and for grand intentions tough calls are equally important. I am mustering the courage to do so because your love inspires me to do so. And I will continue to do such things because of your love. 
Some people told me “ Modi ji you asked us to send you suggestions on Facebook, twitter or email. But a large section of the social class does not have access to these facilities, so what can they do. Your point is very valid. Everyone does not have this facility. Well then, if you have something to say related to Mann Ki Baat, that you hear on the radio even in the villages then do write into me on the following address
Mann Ki Baat
Akashvani
Sansad Marg
New Delhi. 
Even if you send some suggestions through letters they will definitely reach me. And I will take them seriously as active citizens are the biggest asset for development. You write one letter, it indicates that you are very active. When you give your opinion, it means that you are concerned with national issues and this is strength of the nation. I welcome you. 
For my Mann Ki Baat, your mann ki baat sould also reach me. Maybe you will definitely write a letter. I will try and interact with you again next month. I will try, that whenever I talk, it is Sunday, around 11 am. So I am getting closer to you. 
The weather is changing. Winters are slowly setting in. This is a good month for health. Some find it a good season for eating. Some find it good for wearing nice clothes. Besides food and clothes it is a good season for health. Don’t let it go waste. Make the most of it. 
Thank You. 
#DELIMITER#
28 10 2014, India
Visit of prime minister of vietnam
Your Excellency, Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung Members of the Media
I am delighted to welcome Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung to India. His third visit to India is a testimony to his strong confidence and interest in the relations between our two countries.
Since entering office, my government has promptly and purposefully intensified our engagement in the Asia Pacific region, which is critical to India`s future.It is no surprise that Vietnam has been at the forefront of our efforts. Our President paid a highly successful State visit to Vietnam in September; our External Affairs Minister visited Vietnam in August.
India and Vietnam share ancient spiritual and cultural links, which is reflected in Prime Minister Dung`s visit to Bodh Gaya before coming to Delhi. We are two developing nations. We have been steadfast in our support for each other and we have stood with each other in difficult moments. We in India admire the people of Vietnam for the courage and resolve with which they have overcome many formidable challenges to their nation.
Today, our partnership is important for promoting our nations`prosperity and essential for advancing peace and stability in our shared neighbourhood. We have shared interest in maritime security, including freedom of navigation and commerce and peaceful settlement of maritime disputes in accordance with international law.
In our discussions today, Prime Minister Dung and I had strong convergence of views on our region and how to further deepen our bilateral relations.
Our defence cooperation with Vietnam is among our most important ones. India remains committed to the modernization of Vietnam`s defence and security forces. This will include expansion of our training programme, which is already very substantial, joint exercises and cooperation in defence equipment. We will quickly operationalise the 100 million dollars Line of Credit that will enable Vietnam acquire new naval vessels from India. We have also agreed to enhance our security cooperation, including in counter-terrorism.
We have also agreed to increase our cooperation in Space, including in space applications and launch of Vietnam`s satellites, and in peaceful uses of civil nuclear energy.
We emphasized the need for stronger economic relationship as an essential component of a strong strategic partnership. We see great opportunities for increased trade and enhanced Indian participation in areas such energy, infrastructure, textiles, chemicals, machinery, agro-processing and information technology in Vietnam. We have offered to discuss additional lines of credit to support Vietnam`s efforts to diversify its industry and economic linkages.
Vietnam`s recent decisions on infrastructure projects for Indian companies, the award of a banking licence to Bank of India and commencement of direct air links through Jet Airways and Vietnam Airlines reflect the new momentum in our economic relations.
I thanked Prime Minister for Vietnam`s commitment to collaboration with India in its oil and gas sector and its additional offer of exploration blocks. We will continue to deepen our cooperation in this sector and associated downstream industry.
Cultural, academic and people-to-people exchanges constitute an equally important pillar of our relationship. The agreements that we have signed today - MoU on Conservation and Restoration of Cham Monuments at My Son, MoU on Vietnam`s participation in the Nalanda University and MoU on Audio Visual Cooperation – are just some of the steps that we are taking to promote greater contacts and tourism between our two countries.
I have thanked Prime Minister Dung for Vietnam`s co-sponsorship of the resolution in the UN General Assembly to declare June 21 as the International Yoga Day.
I conveyed my appreciation for Vietnam’s consistent support to India’s candidature for permanent membership of a reformed United Nations Security Council. We will continue to work together in regional forums, including the forthcoming East Asia Summit and India-ASEAN Summit, for peace, stability and prosperity in the region.
As Vietnam assumes the role ofASEAN Coordinator for India in 2015, I am confident that India’s integration with our ASEAN partners will get a further impetus.
I am very happy to say that the State Visit of Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung, together with our President`s visit last month,has not only strengthened our traditional friendship, but also accelerated the momentum of our Strategic Partnership.
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
13 10 2014, India
Sansad Adarsh Gram Yojana
All the governments that have come to power in India since Independence have been working for rural development in their own ways. These efforts should continue relentlessly while adapting with time. Plans should be made according to changing times and the speed of change should gain pace in accordance with the pace of the world. This is an ever-continuing process. However it is important to introduce some new elements each time to speed up and enliven this process. 
Every State of India has at least 5 to 10 villages that it can be proud of. There is a different feeling when we enter such villages. If government planning creates these villages, then there should have been more of such villages. Since there are only a few, it means there is something extra, apart from government plans. This something extra is the soul of Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana. 
Plans exist for all villages, but some villages progressed as there were some people in those villages with a different thought process. Some leaders who led differently to bring about these changes. It is not that there are no other better villages. There are. And they have been built by our people only. Need of the hour is to bring some changes in the decision making process and the beginning has to be made somewhere. 
Today is the birth anniversary of Jayaprakash Narayan Ji, a vibrant young force of freedom struggle. The way he led his life after independence keeping away from politics and dedicating himself to creative work alone, is a source of inspiration for all of us. There was always a shadow of Gandhiji and Vinobaji on his thoughts. Lohiaji was also an influence. He said that Gram Dharma is an important thing and till the time our villages don’t think or move as a society, Gram Dharma is not possible. And if Gram Dharma is possible then the village can choose its path to new heights. 
The Village was always present in Mahatma Gandhi’s life. Gandhi ji returned from abroad in 1915. Within two years he implemented what he had learnt in Champaran, Bihar, where he fought for the rights of people. It was done with people’s participation. The seeds of freedom struggle were sowed by Gandhi ji in villages only. Today is also the birth anniversary of Shri NanaJi Deshmukh - a close comrade of Jai Prakash Narayan ji. 
Nanaji dedicated himself to the development of JaiPrabha Nagar near Chitrakoot, which was named after Jai Prakash Narayan and his wife Prabha Devi. Based on the model of JaiPrabha Nagar, he worked to make rural life self-sufficient in many villages of Uttar Pradesh. 
Our former President Abdul Kalam ji visited these villages and mentioned them in many of his speeches. The point is, today we have to take the Adarsh Gram Yojana forward with our MPs’ guidance, MPs’ leadership and MPs’ efforts. For the time being, we have thought of a total of three villages in this term. One model village should be achieved by 2016 and based on that experience, two more model villages are to be achieved by 2019. Later, every year, one village can be done by a MP. We are almost 800 MPs and if we do three villages before 2019 then 2,500 villages will be covered. 
If the States also make schemes for their MLAs based on this scheme, then six-seven thousand more villages can be added. If a village in a block improves then it doesn’t stop there. It is adopted by nearby villages also. They also discuss what is being done and how it can be replicated. This can initiate a viral effect. That is why it is important how we lay its foundation. 
For a long time this debate has been going on in the country about whether development model should be top-to-bottom or bottom-to-top. Let the discussion go on. Academic discussions have their own importance. But the responsibility of doers is to do. We need to start somewhere. So let us sit at the bottom and look at one village in our constituency at least. 
Many people don’t understand the biggest benefit from this. Today an MP is engaged in tackling problems of the public in his constituency. Irrespective of the party, the MP is accountable and has to perform. However most of his or her time and energy is spent in immediate problems. Secondly, his/her energy and time is spent in getting work done from the government and officers. I can’t say whether I will be able to change this. What happens to MPLADS funds? Constituency people demand this or that. Then it is distributed, given to government officers with an instruction that it should please most of the village. Only small schemes are undertaken ultimately. 
This is the kind of work which, with focused activities, can make the MP feel that his / her name will be associated with the village for years to come. The village always remember that earlier the village was like this, and one MP came and changed all that. 
Today, there are many government schemes. An MP might be coming in touch with these schemes only in parts. What is the problem in uniting the streams of these different schemes? What are the shortcomings and what are the ways to improve? Once an MP starts discussing this in the village, many deficiencies of government system will be revealed. 
It is not a small risk that I have taken here. However, on the basis of my knowledge and experience, I can say that once an MP is associated with this, many problems will come to the fore. This will lead to a change in system. Then everybody will think that if we have changed one village, then we can do the same elsewhere also. What happens now a days? A scheme comes to a village. A water tank is dug at one place, tube-well at other place. If there is tube-well, there is no water tank and vice-versa. Expenditure is done but without outcome. That is why the MP is going to be involved in every activity of village life to bring the focus on the outcome. 
There is a flexibility in this programme to choose any village. If possible it should have a population of 3,000-5,000. This does not mean that smaller or bigger habitations are not be touched. This is flexible. But if approximately 3,000 to 5,000 population is there, then a system can be worked out. In hilly and tribal areas where such big villages are not there, the number should be between 1,000 to 3,000. 
Only one condition has been imposed by me. And that is that the MPs must not pick their own village, or village of their in-laws. Apart from this, choose any village. Even I have to select a village in Varanasi. A guideline has been brought out today. I will also go to Varanasi and talk to the people there, and after consultation, will select the village. 
One of the biggest problems for us has been that our development model has been supply-driven. A scheme has been prepared in Lucknow, Gandhi Nagar, or Delhi. The same is attempted to be injected. We want to shift this model from supply-driven to demand driven through Aadrash Gram. There should be an urge developed in the village itself. The villagers should themselves come out and tell us what they need. This scheme is not just to construct a bridge or a pond. 
Can a change be brought about in our today’s conditions or not? Someone please tell me that if there is a school, Panchayat Ghar, Temple, or a place of worship in the village, should not that be clean? Do we need a budget to tell us this? 
I have been lucky, not many people in political life may have been so lucky. I have travelled for 45 years. Must have stayed overnight in more than 400 districts of India. There must have been at least 5,000 villages outside Gujarat that I visited. Therefore, I understand these things from experience. We should create a confidence in the villages and make them committed to this. 
Please tell me, in a village of 3,000 to 5,000, how many deliveries take place in a year? Maximum 100. Out of these 50-60 women will be economically sound. 25-30 women will be such who will need the village’s support for nutrition. If this happens, the chances of malnutrition in the child and maternal mortality will be reduced drastically. 
If this was to be done by Government of India, then a Cabinet note would have been prepared, department’s comments would have been taken, tender would have been floated. And everyone knows what happens after the tender is floated. Then six months later, some breaking news would have come in newspapers. In this, no tender, budget, Cabinet or Minister is needed. People of the village will collectively decide that if 25 women are expecting and they are poor, then the village will take care of the extra nutritional food for three-four months. 
I say, friends, this is easy. All we need is to change our mind set. We need to unite people’s hearts. Normally MPs are engaged in political activities, but after this, when they will come to the village, there will be no political activities. It will be like family. Decisions will be taken sitting with the people of the villages. It will re-energise and unite the village. Problems will be solved. 
Currently, there is a mid-day meal scheme run by the government. It is a good thing, should be there. Often there are 80-100 families in the village who celebrate occasions like birthdays, death anniversaries of family elders etc. They should be contacted and be told that when such celebratory occasions come, they should come go to the school with family. They should bring some sweets to the school and sit with the students for the mid-day meal and share with them. This will lead to a good movement of social harmony. At the same time, this can also work as input to improve the quality of the mid-day meal. This doesn’t require any big scheme we can take this forward, can’t we? 
Government is planning to establish Gobar Gas Plants in villages. As you know some one or two persons avail it due to their capacity to get government money. But cow dung is not available. Then, in one or two years, the plant becomes a monument. How many monuments will you keep building? Now imagine, that there is a “Gobar Bank” of the village. The entire cow dung in the village can be deposited in such a bank and a common gas plant is built with this. Gas is supplied to the entire village. Our mothers and sisters suffer a lot due to smoke from the chulhas. I am seeing an opportunity which doesn’t involve expenditure. Those who would deposit the gobar will get the same amount during the agriculture season as fertilizer. This will also bring cleanliness in the village along with fertilizer and gas. Improvement in health parameters due to clean village will be an extra benefit. I say that we should take interest in creating such an atmosphere in the village. 
Sometimes I think, are we able to create an atmosphere where people can be proud of village? Unless we create such an atmosphere, change will not come. This is very important. Every village has its birthday, why should it not be celebrated like a festival when everybody will come together they will think about what can be done for the village? I think government schemes were always the foundation of Adarsh Gram Yojana. There is no change in that. But this is an experiment to fill the gaps. If I think that it is the ultimate solution, I will be disbelieving in the thinking power of humanity. No thinking is complete, every thinking moves towards completeness. Therefore I believe nothing is ultimate. Whatever has happened is good. Whatever is happening today is step forward. It will not work if we consider it a full stop. The point is that as per requirement, the government should have flexibility. It should not work by diktat, but it should facilitate. I say this with full faith that any MP will develop his or her village as a place of pilgrimage after 2016. He/She will tell his/her relatives that I have built a village, let’s go and see that. This is the satisfaction level that leads to solutions in the life of a person. 
Jai Prakash Narayan ji had said an important thing which, I believe, is inspiring even in these times. He said that democracy and politics cannot be separated. Politics is democracy’s second nature. This is important. We are fed up of dirty politics. Dirty politics gives a bad name to the entire political field. This or that party is not the issue. An atmosphere of trust has suffered. Jai Prakash Narayan ji said something very good. He said that freedom from politics is not the way. We should see how fast liberal and good politics takes the place of dirty politics. I believe that “Sansad Aadarsh Gram Yojna” is opening a new door of creative politics. 
Will I get votes in the village? Are the communities in the village my supporters? Am I on good terms with the local leaders in the village? We need to rise above all this and leave it all outside the village boundaries when we do this work. Here, the village is a community, a cohesive society. Can I be a facilitator or a catalytic agent to fulfil their dreams? Can I work as a friend with a feeling of oneness? 
When in 2016 this will be discussed in the Parliament, MPs will speak in the Parliament on the basis of the experience. Howsoever insensitive the government may be, it will have to acknowledge the experience of the Parliamentarian. Howsoever strong might be the majority of the government, it will have to change its policies. Weight of the Parliamentarian is going to increase. No government will be able to deny this because the MP will say that I went to the village, I am working, these are the problems in my village, the policies of your government are wrong, your schemes are incorrect and your officers don’t understand. The power of these words will become the reason for change in the government’s policies. This country is going to choose bottom-to-top approach. In the academic word bottom-to-top, top-to-bottom approaches are discussed. But we want to make a beginning somewhere. For this I say demand-driven and not supply-driven. Can we choose a society-driven development approach rather than a government-driven one? Can we increase people’s participants along with government facilitation? 
We were just watching a video about a village in Andhra. They have set up 28 committees in such a small village. All are functional, there are not for show. And they have done it. If we take this inspiration, if today Parliamentarians and tomorrow MLAs will take forward 7-8 thousands villages every year, it will create a viral effect that will change the entire model of development of rural clusters. 
We should understand that the aspirations of a rural person are no less than an urban person. He is also watching the world and wants a change in his quality of life. He also wants good education for his children. If long distance education is available, he wants it. 
Let’s talk about drip irrigation. Who can deny that there is a water crisis everywhere? Won’t I place drip irrigation in every field of my chosen village? I’ll bring all the schemes of the government, will help them in getting loans from banks. Can I increase their production through drip irrigation? Economy of the village will change. There will be cattle rearing and increased milk production, improved situation of cattle. I will bring officers, explain things to them and bring change. 
Friends, I believe that rural life can be changed. Those MPs who have been elected from urban areas and don’t have any village, I request them to choose a nearby village. My friends from Rajya Sabha should select a village of their choice from the states from which they are coming. Nominated MPs can choose any village from all over India. We will all collectively try to open the door of creative politics and will work away from political untouchability. 
Jai Prakash Ji, Mahatama Gandhi, Ram Manohar Lohia ji, Pandit Deen Dayal Ji, are such icons of last century whose shadow is there on the political life of today. All may not have impacted all but everyone must have been influenced a little by someone. We should take inspiration from them and move this work ahead. This is my expectation from you. 
I said on 15th August that on 11th October, on the birth anniversary of Jai Prakash ji, we will present the guidelines. Some of my friends informed me of their selection of village that evening itself. And they were not BJP MPs alone. Even MPs from other parties, for example even Congress MPs, wrote to me. That day itself I felt that this concept has value. That is why people are adopting it beyond party politics. 
Still there are many like me, who have to select the village. It is pending in my area also because I wanted to decide after the guidelines are prepared and in consultation with the people and officers of Varanasi. I will surely do this in the next 15-20 days. We should convey this confidence that there will be more villages in the future. A model is emerging. If we manage to show this model to villagers, change will be automatic. We will bring about rural development by our efforts and not by diktat. The letter has been written and the job is done - this is not like that. This will not be accomplished by asking questions in the Parliament. We need to work collectively. 
I believe that we are experimenting with a new way of serving Mother India in a big way. I complement all the Parliamentarians from the deepest core of my heart that all party members have accepted this, welcomed this. This is not a final scheme, there will be many changes, many reforms, many practical situations will emerge. This is not a money-related scheme. This scheme is people-driven and will be accomplished through people’s participation and Parliamentarians’ guidance. We should take this forward. With this hope, I thank you all. 
Once again I pay my tributes to Jai Prakash ji. 
#DELIMITER#
3 10 2014, India
Mann ki Baat
My Dear Countrymen, 
Today is the holy festival of Vijay Dashami. My heartiest greetings on this occasion of Vijay Dashami to one and all. 
Through the medium of radio, I would like to share few heartfelt thoughts with you today. And, I hope that not only today, this series of conversation may be carried out regularly in future. I will try my best, if possible, to take out time twice a month or even once to speak with you. In future, I have also decided that whenever I will speak to you, it would be on Sundays and time would be morning 11. In that way, it would be convenient for you too and I will feel contented with the fact that I am successful in sharing my thoughts with you. 
We are celebrating the festival of Vijay Dashami today, which symbolises the triumph of Good over Evil. But one gentleman named Ganesh Venkatadari, a native of Mumbai, sent me a mail and has written to me that we must take a vow to eliminate ten bad habits from within ourselves on this occasion of Vijay Dashami. I express my gratitude to him for this recommendation. We all, as individuals, must be thinking to put an end to all our bad habits and win over them, although, with respect to our nation, I believe we all should come together and take a vow in eliminating all the dirt from our country. On this occasion of Vijay Dashami, we must take a vow to eliminate dirt and filth and we can do so on this occasion. 
Yesterday, on 2nd October on the eve of Mahatma Gandhi’s birth anniversary, more than 1.25 crore countrymen have started the ‘Swachh Bharat’ movement. I had shared one thought yesterday which is that I will nominate nine people and they need to upload their videos of cleaning the nation on social media websites, and nominating nine more people to do the same. I want you all to join me, clean the nation, and nominate nine more people to clean the nation, and those nine people must do the same. Eventually, the entire nation will have this atmosphere. I strongly believe that you all will join hands with me to carry this movement forward. 
Whenever, we think of Mahatma Gandhi, naturally we are reminded of Khaadi. You may be wearing variety of clothes with different fabrics and company brands in your family. But is it not possible to include Khaadi too? I am not telling you to use only Khaadi products. I am just insisting to use, at least one Khaadi product, like handkerchief, or a bath towel, a bed sheet, a pillow cover, a curtain or anything of that kind. If you have an inclination for all kinds of fabrics and clothes in your family, you can also buy Khaadi products on a regular basis. I am saying this as when you buy Khaadi products, it helps poor people to light lamps on Diwali. Also, you can avail a special discount on Khaadi products from 2nd October for a month. It is a very small thing, but has very big impact which binds you with the poor. How you see this as a success. When I speak of 1.25 crore countrymen and infer the outcome, we might assume that government will take care of everything and as individuals we stand nowhere. We have seen that if we intend to progress then we need to identify our potential, understand our strengths and I can swear that we form the incomparable souls of this world. You all know that our own scientists have been successful in reaching Mars, bearing least expenses. We do not lack in our strengths, but have forgotten our strong points. We have forgotten ourselves. We have become hopeless. My dear Brothers and Sisters I cannot let this happen. I always remember one of the sayings by Swami Vivekananda ji as he always used to emphasize on one thought and possibly, he might have shared this thought with many others. 
Vivekananda ii used to say, once a lioness was carrying her two cubs on the way and came upon a flock of sheep from a distance. She got a desire to prey upon them and started running towards the flock. Seeing her running, one of the cub too, joined her. The other cub was left behind and the lioness moved on, post preying upon the flock. One of the cub went with the lioness but the other cub was left behind, and was brought up by a mother sheep. He grew among the sheep, started speaking their language and adapted their ways of life. He used to sit, laugh and enjoy with them. The cub who went with the lioness, was a grown-up now. Once, he happened to meet his brother and was shocked to see him. He thought in his mind,” He is a lion and is playing with sheep, talking like sheep. What is wrong with him? He felt that his ego was at stake and went to talk to his brother. He said,” What are you doing, brother? You are a lion.” He gets a reply from his brother, “No, I am a sheep. I grew up with them. They have brought me up. Listen to my voice and the way I talk.” He said, “Come, I will show you, who you really are.” He took his brother to a well and told him to look in the water his own reflection, and asked him, if both of them had similar faces. “I am a lion, you, too, are a lion.” His brother’s self-esteem got awakened; he attained self-realization through this and even a lion brought up among sheep started roaring like a lion. His inner entity was awakened. Swami Vivekananda ji used to say the same. My countrymen, 125 crore Indians have indefinite strengths and capabilities. We need to understand ourselves. We need to identify our inner strengths and like Swami ji always used to say, we need to carry our self-respect, identify ourselves and move forward in life and be successful, which in turn, make our nation a winning and successful country. I believe, all our countrymen with a population of 125 crores are efficient, strong and can stand against any odds with confidence.
These days, I have been getting many letters through social media websites, like Facebook, from my friends. One of them, Mr. Gautam Pal, has addressed an issue regarding the specially-abled children. He has suggested forming separate Municipality, Municipal Corporation or councils for them. We need to plan something for them for enhancing their moral support. I liked his suggestion and I have experienced this during my day as Chief Minister of Gujarat. A Special Olympics was held in Athens in 2011. After the Olympics I had called all the participants and winners of specially-abled category from Gujarat to my home. I spent two hours with them, and it was the most emotional and inspiring incident of my life. As I believe, a specially-abled child is not only the responsibility of the parents in a family, it is the responsibility of the entire society. God has chosen this family to support a specially-abled child, but a child is a responsibility of the entire nation. After this incident, I got so emotionally attached with them, I started organizing separate Olympics for them in Gujarat. Thousands of children with their parents used to come and attend, I, too, used to attend the Olympics. There was an atmosphere of trust and, this is the reason, I liked the suggestion given by Mr. Gautam Pal and I felt like sharing this thought with you. 
It reminds me of another story. Once, a traveller was sitting at the corner of a road, and was asking everyone the way to a specific place. He continued asking the route from many people. A man, sitting beside him was observing him. The traveller stood up and started asking passers-by again. He stood up and said,” The way to your destination is here.” The traveller, then, said,” Brother, you were sitting next to me for so long, saw me asking everyone the route. If you knew the route, why didn’t you tell me before?” The man answered,” I was waiting to verify if you really intend to reach your destination or you are asking people just for your knowledge. But, when you stood up, I was assured that you truly wish to reach your destination, and decided to confirm the address”.
My countrymen, till the time we do not decide to walk, stand on our own, we will also not the get the guidance from others in our journey. We will not get the people to hold our hand and help us in walking. We need to take the initiative in walking and I trust all my 125 crore Indians, who are capable of walking on their own and will keep moving. 
For the past few days, I have been getting very interesting suggestions from people. I am aware, when to adapt to these suggestions. But, I want everyone to actively participate in these suggestions as we all belong to our nation, the nation does not only belong to any Government. We are the citizens of our Nation and we all need to unite without any exceptions. Some of you have suggested simplifying the registration process for Small Scale Industries. I will definitely put this under Government’s notice. Some of you have written to me to incorporate skills development courses in the school curriculum from 5th standard. This will help the students to learn various skills and crafts. I loved this effective suggestion given by them. They have also suggested that even the adults should learn skills development courses along with their studies. One of the suggestions given was to keep a dustbin at every 100 meters and a cleaning system should be established. 
Some of you have written to me, to abolish the use of plastic bags. I am receiving numerous suggestions from people. I have always been telling you, to write to me and narrate a true incident, which is positive and inspiring to me and our Countrymen, along with the evidence. If you do this, I can promise this to you, that I will share all those heartfelt thoughts or suggestions with all our Countrymen, through “Mann ki Baat”. 
I have only one intention in speaking with you all,” Come, let us serve our Mother India. Let us all take our nation to the new heights. Let us all take a step forward. If you take one step, our nation takes 125 crore steps to move forward, and for this purpose, on this auspicious occasion of Vijay Dashami, we all need to defeat all of our inner evils and decide to start doing something good for the nation. Today is the fortunate beginning for me. I will be sharing my heartfelt thoughts with one and all. Today, I have shared all the thoughts coming directly from my heart. I will meet you all next at 11 am on Sundays, but I trust our journey shall never end and will continue receiving love and suggestions from you. 
After listening to my thoughts, please do not hesitate in sharing your thoughts or advice to me, I will appreciate that your suggestions keep coming. I am glad to talk with you through this simple medium of Radio, which serves each and every corner of the nation. I can reach the poorest homes, as mine, my nation’s strength lies within the hut of Poor, within the villages; my nation’s strength lies with the Mothers, Sisters and Youths; my nation’s strength lies with the farmers. Nation will only progress, if you believe in it. I am expressing my trust towards the nation. I believe in your strength, hence, I believe in our nation’s future. 
I would once again, like to thank one and all for taking out time and listening to me. Thank you all. 
#DELIMITER#
2 10 2014, India
Launch of Swachhata mission
Following is the English rendering of the text of Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi at the launch of Swachhata Mission, here today.
“Bharat Mata ki Jai, Long Live Mahatma Gandhi, Long Live Lal Bahadur Shastri.
My Colleagues from Central Government, Shri Venkaiah Naidu ji and Shri Nitin Gadkari ji, dignitaries and my young friends.
Today is 2nd October, birth anniversaries of our Pujya Mahatma Gandhi and Lal Bahadur Shashtri ji. Lal Bahadur Shastri gave us the Mantra of Jai Jawan Jai Kisan. Indian Farmers filled the granaries in reply to that exhortation. Pujya Bapu gave us the message of ‘Quit India- Clean India’. Our countrymen, under the leadership of Mahatma Gandhi, freed the nation from colonialism. Bapu’s dream of cleanliness, however, remains unfulfilled.
Here, we had called for a logo and an idea through crowd-sourcing, asked the people for a tagline. Bhai Anant of Maharashtra and sister Bhagyashri won the contest. It was right to the point. I can see, that through these glasses Gandhiji is looking and asking whether we have cleaned India or not. This is not just a logo. Through these glasses he is looking, asking- what have you done? What will you do and how? By when will you do it? This is the message of the logo that has Mahatma Gandhi’s glasses. They give us the message of Clean India. I compliment the creator of this logo- Shri Anant. One tag line has been given by Bhagyashri- ‘one step towards cleanliness’. Not a big deal, just a step. For this I complement Bhagyashri.
My dear countrymen,
Today from this platform with all the authenticity, and purity at my command, India Gate is right in front of me where flame of our martyrs is burning, I swear by that, I am not making a political statement. All Governments of this country must have done their bit for this cause. Many social, cultural and religious leaders must have contributed towards this task. There may have been different people, different forms of programme, I salute all of them. I have to take this series forward. I don’t make any claim that the new Government is doing everything. I acknowledged all previous Governments from the Red Fort also. Today, from this august platform I convey my respect to all Governments whether of Centre or of State, municipal bodies, social organizations, Sarvodaya leaders, Seva Dal workers. As this holy mission is starting today, I salute every one of them and pray to all countrymen to start this programme.
Sometimes I feel that the job of getting rid of filth belongs to Safai karmchari only? Isn’t it the duty of all the 125 crore countrymen? Will we keep on imposing everything on them only? Something good happens or bad, will be keep on blaming them only? We have to change this situation. Like all 125 crore Indians the Prime Minister is also first son of Bharat Mata and Prime Minister later. Therefore, as the children of this mother, all of us are responsible that we should not keep our country like this. It may be village neighborhood, home family, school and college, Mandir, Masjid or Gurudwara; how can we keep it dirty? Wherever we see filth or see someone throwing papers why don’t we feel like picking that up? I know this will not be accomplished only by publicity campaign. Old habits take time to change. It’s a difficult task, I know. But we have till 2019 when we will observe 150th anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi.
I am grateful to my media friends who are spreading this message. If we collectively make it a people’s movement then I don’t see any reason why we will not be counted among the clean cities and nations of the world. India can also do it, Indians can do it. If Indians can reach Mars with minimum expense then can’t they clean their neighborhood? No Prime Minister or Minister took us to Mars. It was done by the scientists; children of Mother India. Cleanliness will also be achieved together.
I know, in coming days I will be criticized. Look what has been achieved? I understand lot of criticism will come my way. However, I am ready to face all the criticism for making Mother India pristine once again. I have come with the determination that 125 crore Indians will not let Mother India remain dirty. We will not leave any stone unturned to fulfill Bapu’s dreams.
I have decided to start a movement in social media also. It is there on MyGov.in website also. A new website has been created on ‘Clean India’. Work has been started on Facebook and Twitter also. #MycleanIndia was started today. I appeal all the countrymen to upload photographs of garbage, then clean that and upload the video and the photographs of the cleaned place. I also appeal to media. There are many youngsters, organizations in every nook and corner of the country. They are doing the work of cleanliness way before I became the Prime Minister. They should be brought to the limelight by Media. All common people who work for cleanliness should be highlighted. All of us should create an inspiring environment. Finger pointing will not help as I told earlier this is beyond politics. This is a work solely inspired by patriotism. We will do it with patriotic feeling. There is no place for politics. That is why I say there are many organizations and social and cultural bodies those who are working in their own way. I have seen many villages where Sarpanch is so alert and villagers keep the village in exemplary cleanliness. Many people are like that. Some of the teachers take lot of interest in keeping the premises clean, the atmosphere is kept very pure.
When we come to India Gate and go towards Rashtrapati Bhawan it feels nice to see the clean surroundings. Should not every corner of India be this clean? Isn’t this our social duty? We will do a great disservice by treating it politically or considering it a photo opportunity. Mahatma Gandhi did not go to every locality to clean up but his commitment created awareness towards cleanliness in entire India. We also have to do it together. Wherever we are, we should do it. I believe we will be able to clean our Mother India. This is a work for 125 crore Indians. In those 125 crore Indians there is a person called Modi. Not that Modi is alone but there are 125 crore Indians and I am saying it 125 crore times. This work is not only for Government or for Ministers, neither is this work only of social organizations and devoted social workers. This is a mass movement. The more we associate this with common person, the more are the chances of success.
Today Navarati is coming to an end. Tomorrow we will celebrate Vijayadashmi. I convey my best wishes to all countrymen for Vijayadashmi tomorrow.
Today, I have started a programme on social media. I have invited 9 people to come to public place and work for cleanliness. I am sure that those 9 people whom I have invited will surely do this work. Not only this, I have requested them that they should also invite 9 other people. Then 9 more. I request you also that you also upload videos of your cleanliness projects and this chain of 9 should carry on. Today, I have invited Goa Governor Hon’ble Mridula Sinha, Bharat Ratna Sachin Tendulkar, Yoga Guru Baba Ramdev, Congress leader Shri Shashi Tharoor jee, Shriman Kamal Hasan, Shriman Salman Khan, sister Priyanka Chopra and the entire team of Tarak Mehta ka Ulta Chashma. I have told them to push this through their and other serials. Our film industry will also see, in last fifty years there have been many movies where they were episodes related to cleanliness. We need to encourage this and do our duty.
Brothers and sisters there is a startling evaluation of WHO – they say that the diseases created by lack of cleanliness results in additional loss of 6500 rupees to every Indian. Due to illness someone is not able to drive taxi or auto rickshaw or not able to distribute newspapers or not able to deliver milk. This is just the average of the total loss. If we take out affluent households then burden on poor people will go up to 12-15 thousand. If we just spread cleanliness, our poor will be saved 6500 rupees. This will save him from diseases and unemployment. This movement is very important for the health of the poor. Serving Mother India is serving the poorest.
Come let’s see on MyGov.in, my Facebook or twitter, the mood that I am witnessing, the enthusiasm that I see, fills me with hope that public is ready to move hundred steps ahead of the Government. If public is moving there is no reason to stop them.
Brothers and sisters, We should gift something to Mahatma Gandhi. In 2019 when Gandhiji will turn 150, we should gift him a Swachh Bharat created with a collective responsibility. Quit India was successful due to the involvement of everyone in the freedom struggle. Success of clean India lies in the involvement of 125 crore Indians. Jai Jawan, Jai Kisan was successful as it was given by Lal Bahadur Shastri. He called for agricultural production. Nobody asked Lal Bahadur Shastri that, are you going to the fields to plough them, have you done some farming or produced some foodgrain? Nobody asked anything. But as Lal Bahadur Shastri said Jai Kisan- all the farmers stood up and filled the granaries. The momentous tasks of giving food to every poor in India was done on the words of this great man. Now, this is the time to realise Mahatma Gandhi’s words. Just look at the purity of this great man’s words, its power, its dedication: Shouldn’t this inspire us? Whether it is me or you, success of clean India will give us the same pleasure as the success of Quit India slogan. It will give us similar joy and prosperity. We have started moving ahead with our faith in the words of these great men.
Don’t put your trust on me or my Government, trust Mahatma Gandhi. Trust his sacrifice, determination and dedication. Believe in his dream of Swachh Bharat. Today this is our responsibility that if we are the children of Mother India we should not either cause filth or allow other to do it. Often when we go to foreign countries, we say how clean it was there, there was no dirt anywhere. Then I ask these people, did you like the fact that it was so clean? Then I ask, did you see anyone littering or spitting? They say, no we didn’t. Then I say that the secret of cleanliness is in the discipline of their citizens. If we manage that, I am sure we will do wonders. One more work is there – that of building toilets. In our villages more than sixty percent people are still going to toilet in open. I feel most pained that even our mothers and sisters have to go in open. We have to remove this blot. I have told corporate social responsibility people to prioritize this. We should do this much at least for the dignity of our mothers and sisters.
Even today, there are many schools which don’t have separate toilets for girls. We need to change this. It is nobody’s fault; we just need to move ahead with a positive outlook of future. There should not be any political comment by any member of this movement as everybody has work. Every one before us also worked. Under Mahatma Gandhi, Congress was at the forefront of it.
I worship this work, that is why I request specially to media and countrymen with folded hands that, associate this movement only with love for the country. Link this movement only with the worship of Mother India and with the poor and health of the poor. We should not vitiate the environment by talking about, who is doing who is not, who was successful, who was not. We should move with a sense of collective responsibility. With collective responsibility we will surely be successful.
Now I invite every one of you. We are going to take an oath here. My request is that those who are sitting should take oath sitting, no need to stand up. Those who are standing should keep on standing. My second request is that you should raise both of your hands and remember Mahatma Gandhi. Feel that this work is for building a Bharat of the dreams of Pujya Bapu. We should not just utter the words but take solemn pledge. You will take the pledge, take the movement forward and will leave no stone unturned.
Mahatma Gandhi dreamt of an India which was not only free but also clean and developed. Mahatma Gandhi secured freedom for Mother India. Now it is our duty to serve Mother India by keeping the country neat and clean.
I take this pledge that I will remain committed towards cleanliness and devote time for this. I will devote 100 hours per year that is two hours per week to voluntary work for cleanliness. I will neither litter nor let others litter. I will initiate the quest for cleanliness with myself, my family, my locality, my village and my work place.
I believe that the countries of the world that appear clean are so because their citizens don’t indulge in littering nor do they allow it to happen.
With this firms belief, I will propagate the message of Swachh Bharat Mission in villages and towns.
I will encourage 100 other persons to take this pledge which I am taking today.
I will endeavour to make them devote their 100 hours for cleanliness.
I am confident that every step I take towards cleanliness will help in making my country clean.
Jai Hind!
Long live Mahatma Gandhi
Long live Mahatma Gandhi
Long live Mahatma Gandhi
Best wishes to all!
#DELIMITER#
30 9 2014, USA
Joint Press Statement with President of USA 
Mr. President, members of the media,
First, I want to thank President Obama for his invitation and his warm and generous hospitality.
I am pleased to visit USA and meet President Obama at the start of my tenure.
I am happy that we are meeting here just a few days after the Indian and the U.S. missions reached Mars around the same time. So, after the India-U.S. summit on Mars, we are meeting here on earth. This happy co-incidence captures the potential of our relationship.
This visit, especially my conversation with President Obama, has reinforced my conviction that India and the United States are natural global partners, based on our shared values, interests and strengths in the digital age. We already have the foundation of a strong partnership. We now have to revive the momentum and ensure that we get the best out of it for our people and for the world.
President and I spoke about many of our common economic priorities. I am confident that India will see rapid economic growth and transformation. We are focusing in India on not just on policies, but also on processes, to make it easy and productive to do business in India. I believe that India-U.S. economic partnership will also grow rapidly in the coming years.
I also sought President Obama`s support for continued openness and ease of access for Indian services companies in the U.S. market.
We are serious about resolution of issues on both sides to enable civil nuclear energy cooperation to take off. It is important for India`s energy security.
We had a candid discussion on Bali Ministerial of the WTO. India supports trade facilitation. However, I also expect that we are able to find a solution that takes care of our concern on food security. I believe that it should be possible to do that soon.
We have agreed to consult and cooperate closely on climate change issues, an area of strong priority for both of us.
There was great convergence on international developments that matter the most to our two countries, including peace and stability in Asia Pacific region. The United States is intrinsic to our Look East and Link West policies.
We discussed existing terrorism challenges, including in South Asia, and the new threats of terrorism in West Asia and beyond. We agreed to intensify our counter-terrorism and intelligence cooperation.
The Afghan people have shown the will to prevail over violence and extremism. We discussed our two countries` continued commitment to assist Afghanistan and our own coordination in this area.
We have shared concern on the Ebola crisis in Africa, for which India has already made financial commitments of 12 million U.S. dollars.
Given our broad range of shared interests, we will also continue to deepen our security dialogue and defence relations. I want to especially welcome the U.S. defence companies to participate in developing the Indian defence industry.
During the last four days in the U.S., I have seen extraordinary interest and excitement about India and India-U.S. partnership among the people of our two countries.
We will draw strength and inspiration from it as we start a more purposeful course in our ongoing journey. I look forward to receiving President Obama and his family in India at a convenient time.
I once again thank President Obama, the people of the United States and, especially, the Indian American community for their warm welcome and hospitality.
#DELIMITER#
27 9 2014, USA
Global Citizen's Festival, New York
How are you doing, New York...
I hope, you are having, a good time...
Namaste. My greetings, to all those, watching on TVs, laptops, tablets and phones, as well. 
This, is a great city. It has assimilated, the world, in itself. 
Today, you have shown, that you also care, for the world outside. 
I am truly delighted, to be here. In the open Central Park. And not inside, a closed Conference Room... 
Among the Youth. Among you. 
Because, you are the future. What you do Today, will decide, our Tomorrow. 
I feel, a current of hope, in this Park. Among you, I feel confident about the future...
You are touching, the lives of those, who are not as fortunate, as you are. What an admirable act, this is. What a sacred mission.
For you to think, about those, who are far. Whose faces, you have not seen. Whose names, you do not know. Whose nationality, does not matter to you.

For you to convert, your thoughts into action. And devote, your time, and energy. So that others, may have a better future too.
Those living in poverty. Without education. Without basic sanitation. Without opportunity. And worse, without hope.
I salute you. I feel proud, of each one of you. I am sure, your families, your friends, your nation, feels just as proud.
Some believe, that the world changes, with the wisdom of the old.
I think, that the idealism, innovation, energy and ‘can do’ attitude, of the youth, is even more powerful.
That is my hope, for India too. 800 million youth, joining hands, to transform our nation. 
To put, the light of hope, in every eye. And, the joy of belief, in every heart. Lift people, out of poverty. Put clean water, and sanitation, within the reach of all. Make healthcare, available to all. A roof, over every head. 

I know, it is possible...
Because, I feel, a new sense of purpose, energy, and will, in India. 
Because, India’s youth, can see that, you are joining hands, with them.
Because, I believe, that we can speak with one voice. For one future...
That, is why, I am here.
Because, I believe in you...
Let me end, with a few lines in Sanskrit, that inspire me, personally:
सर्वे भवन्तु सुखिनः।
सर्वे सन्तु निरामयाः।
सर्वे भद्राणि पश्यन्तु।
मा कश्चित् दुःख भाग्भवेत्॥
ॐ शान्तिः शान्तिः शान्तिः ॥
May All, be prosperous, and happy.
May All, be free from illness.
May All, see what is spiritually uplifting. 
May no one, suffer.
Om Peace, Peace, Peace...
Thank you once again, for having me over.
Thanks in particular, to Hugh Jackman here.
God bless you all. 
May the Force be with You...
#DELIMITER#
18 9 2014, India
Visit of President of China
President Xi Jinping, members of the media,
I am delighted to welcome President Xi Jinping to India. I am especially pleased to host him within months of the formation of my Government in Delhi.
I attach great importance and priority to our relations with China. We are two ancient civilizations with a long history of engagement. China is our largest neighour, and India`s neighbourhood occupies a special place in my national development plans and foreign policy. Today, we are the world`s two most populous countries and its two largest emerging economies. We are both undergoing economic transformation on an unprecedented scale and speed.
Therefore, a climate of mutual trust and confidence; respect for each other`s sensitivities and concerns; and, peace and stability in our relations and along our borders are essential for us to realize the enormous potential in our relations.
If we achieve that, we can reinforce each other`s economic growth. We can contribute to peace, stability and prosperity in our region. And, we can give new direction and energy to the global economy.
Over the two days in Ahmedabad and Delhi, we had opportunities to discuss the full range of issues in our relationship, including political and security issues, economic relations and people-to-people contacts. We have decided to deepen our engagement at all levels and hold regular summit level meetings.
We agreed that our economic relations do not do justice to our potential. I expressed concern at the slowdown in trade and the worsening trade imbalance. I sought his partnership in improving market access and investment opportunities for Indian companies in China. President Xi assured me of his commitment to take concrete steps to address our concerns.
I have invited Chinese investments in India`s infrastructure and manufacturing sectors and spoke about our new policies and administrative steps in this area.
I am pleased with the agreements on two Chinese industrial parks in India and a commitment to realize about 20 billion U.S. dollars of Chinese investments in the next five years. This opens a new chapter in our economic relations. We have also agreed on specific steps to enhance cooperation in upgrading India`s railways sector. We will begin the process of discussions on civil nuclear energy cooperation that will bolster our broader cooperation on energy security.
I welcome our five year economic and trade development plan as an important new step to pursue higher ambitions in our economic relations.
Our agreements and announcements today demonstrate that people-to-people contacts, culture, tourism and art are central to our efforts to strengthen our partnership.
On behalf of the people of India, I thank President Xi for opening a new route through Nathu-La to Kailash Mansarovar. This will be in addition to the existing route through Uttarakhand. The new route offers many benefits. It makes Kailash Mansarovar accessible by a motorable road, which is especially beneficial to the older pilgrims. It offers a safer alternative in the rainy season, makes the pilgrimage shorter in duration, and will enable a much higher number of pilgrims to go there.
As we discussed how to strengthen cooperation, we have also exchanged views on outstanding differences in our relationship in a spirit of candour and friendship.
I raised our serious concern over repeated incidents along the border. We agreed that peace and tranquility in the border region constitutes an essential foundation for mutual trust and confidence and for realizing the full potential of our relationship. This is an important understanding, which should be observed diligently. While our border related agreements and confidence building measures have worked well, I also suggested that clarification of Line of Actual Control would greatly contribute to our efforts to maintain peace and tranquility and requested President Xi to resume the stalled process of clarifying the LAC.
Similarly, we discussed India`s concerns relating to China`s visa policy and Trans Border Rivers. I am confident that their satisfactory resolution would take mutual trust to a new level.
We had a productive discussion on regional and international developments and agreed to strengthen our strategic dialogue on these issues. We both understand that India and China have a shared interest in a peaceful and stable region, including peace, stability and prosperity Afghanistan. We will build closer cooperation on the shared challenges of terrorism and extremism. We also agreed to cooperate on our many shared interests at the global level.
We discussed regional connectivity and the proposal for the Bangladesh, China, India and Myanmar Economic Corridor. Located at the crossroads of Asia, India believes that reconnecting Asia is important for its collective prosperity. I also believe that our efforts to rebuild physical connectivity in the region would also require a peaceful, stable and cooperative environment.
In conclusion, I would like to say that this is a historic opportunity for the relationship between India and China, filled with vast possibilities. We can start a new era in our relations. If we are sensitive to our opportunities and challenges, then I am confident that we will fulfill our responsibility to make it a great success.
Thank you
#DELIMITER#
5 9 2014, India
Visit of Prime Minister of Australia
Your Excellency, Prime Minister Tony Abbott Friends from the Media
I am delighted to welcome Prime Minister Tony Abbott to India. We are fortunate to host him as our government`s first guest on a State Visit to India, because we consider Australia to be a very important strategic partner and we wish to deepen our relations further. 
India and Australia are peace-loving democratic nations, blessed with great diversity in their societies. We are linked by the Indian Ocean. Australia can make a very important contribution to India`s development. India is a resource-constrained country and can meet a considerable part of its requirements from Australia, a country blessed with abundant natural resources. There are enormous possibilities in the area of manufacturing and infrastructure. In the coming years, India can emerge as a major source of highly skilled human resources. 
We have growing cooperation in science, education and skill development. More than 400,000 people of India origin in Australia are making significant contribution to the Australian society and also constitute an effective bridge of friendship between the two countries. 
India and Australia must not only work together with a sense of priority to promote peace and prosperity in Asia, Pacific and Indian Ocean Region, but also take on the responsibility of bringing together all other countries in this endeavour. 
Prime Minister Abbott and I have had detailed discussions on enhancing our cooperation in all areas of our relationship. 
At first, I would like to convey to Prime Minister Abbott the deep sense of gratitude of 1.25 billion people of India for the efforts he has made to bring with him two ancient statues that were stolen from India. 
The moment we had conveyed our request for the return of these statues, his government took this decision with great speed. Prime Minister Abbott and the people of Australian have shown enormous respect and regard not only for our ancient treasure, but also for our cultural heritage. 
The signing of the civil nuclear cooperation agreement is a historic milestone in our relationship. It is a reflection of a new level of mutual trust and confidence in our relationship and will open a new chapter in our bilateral cooperation. It will support India`s efforts to fuel its growth with clean energy and minimize the carbon footprint of its growth. 
Regular and robust dialogue provides a strong foundation for a strong strategic partnership. Prime Minister Abbott and I have decided to enhance our political dialogue and increase our security and defence cooperation, to which we attach great importance in our relationship. We will also enhance exchanges between elected representatives in the Parliament and state assemblies of the two countries. 
There has been no prime ministerial visit from India since 1986. I have accepted Prime Minister Abbott`s invitation to pay a bilateral visit to Australia after the G 20 Summit. We will try and meet each other at every available opportunity. We will increase our dialogue at senior officials` level, including in the political, economic and security areas. We will also increase our consultation and coordination in important forums like the Indian Ocean Region Association and East Asia Summit. 
We will hold our first bilateral naval exercise in 2015 and intend to enhance our exercises in the coming years. Our two countries can contribute to a variety of objectives in the Indian Ocean Region, including in humanitarian assistance and disaster relief. We will also join together in the commemoration of 100 years of the First World War, in which our soldiers fought together. We will also increase our security cooperation to counter terrorism, cyber threats and other security challenges. 
There are vast possibilities for increasing trade and investment cooperation. Prime Minister Abbott has been supportive of Indian investors in Australia and has assured me of speedy clearances for Indian investment proposals in the pipeline. I invited Australian investments into India, including in infrastructure and high technology areas. 
We are concerned about the decline in bilateral trade in the last two years. We have committed to an early conclusion of the Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement (CECA). 
I am delighted that we are announcing fresh funding for the Australia India Strategic Research Fund, which supports research activities in areas like clean energy, water, health, environment and food processing. 
I am pleased that Prime Minister Abbott has announced a new Colombo Plan to increase the flow of Australian students to India. Increase in youth exchanges will deepen mutual understanding and friendship between the two countries. 
Prime Minister Abbott has assured me of full cooperation in the area of skill development, which is a priority sector for me. We have also decided to promote cooperation in higher education, especially at the level of universities, to create world class educational opportunities for Indian youth. 
Our two countries are bound by shared love for cricket and hockey. Today, I have requested Prime Minister Abbott for cooperation in establishing sports universities in India. 
We welcomed the growing people-to-people ties, reflected in the increasing flow of students and tourists between the two countries. 
We cooperate with each other in multilateral forums. I thanked Prime Minister Abbott for the continuing Australian support for India`s permanent membership of the United Nations Security Council. 
I am keenly looking forward to the G 20 Summit. I am confident that under the leadership of Prime Minister Abbott, G 20 will be able to effectively address the global challenges. I also conveyed to him our best wishes for hosting the 2015 Cricket World Cup. 
I am very satisfied with our meeting today. I believe that it will set a new direction in our relationship. I am confident that we will make further progress on our bilateral agenda before the November Summit. I am also confident that Australia will emerge as a strong strategic partner for India a very important part of our Look East Policy. 
#DELIMITER#
5 9 2014, India
Interaction with students on Teacher's day
My dear students and friends from the different schools all over the country and those present in this function.
This is a moment of great happiness for me that I have got an opportunity to interact with children who are carrying dreams of future India in their eyes. Today is Teachers Day. Gradually this inspiring chapter is losing its importance, perhaps there would be many schools where 5th September is not remembered in this form. This has become limited to giving awards to teacher and having ceremonies. Need of the hour is to underline the importance of a teacher in our social life. Till the time we don’t accept this importance neither will we feel the honour for a teacher nor be successful in changing the new generation through the medium of teachers. That is why there is a need to update this great tradition and reenergise it.
There is a need for debate on the reasons why many bright students do not want to become teachers. All of us have to find the answer to this question. In a global context, it is believed that there is a great demand for teachers and good teachers are in short supply. India is a young nation. Can’t India dream of exporting teachers of high calibre? Can’t we instil this desire in the heart of today’s children that I will become a great teacher and will contribute in the progress of my country? How to rekindle this feeling. Dr. Sarvapalli Radhakrishnan has done a great service to this country. He never used to celebrate his birthday as he insisted that the birthday of a teacher should be observed. This concept of teachers’ day is now prevalent in many countries. Ask any great person in the world about the success in the life he or she will definitely tell two things. First this is my mother’s contribution and second, my teacher’s contribution. We get to hear this from about almost every great personalities. But it holds importance only to the point till we follow it diligently. There was a time when this feeling was there for a teacher. If there was one most respected figure in the entire village, it was the teacher. His word was final. Gradually this situation has changed considerably. However, we can establish it once again.
As a child, you might be having many questions. Many of you must be finding difficult to enjoy holidays and will be eagerly waiting for Monday so that you can go and tell the teacher what all was done on Sunday. Things which can’t be told to mother, brother and sister, one feels so eager to tell one’s teacher. This is the level of closeness. The same teacher changes his/her life. Teacher’s word brings the major change in the life of a student. I know of many students who talk like their teache, dress like their teacher, he is their hero. This is a stage which needs to be enlivened to strengthen our new genearation. There is a saying in China that those who think only for a year, they sow foodgrains, those who thinks for a decade, they plant fruits. But those who thinks for generations, they prepare humans. It means to educate, to imbibe culture and to prepare someone for life. How can we make our education system come alive with a zeal for life building.
I have said on 15th August that I want no school should remain without toilet for girls by the end of this year. A number of schools do not have toilets for girls. Some schools do not have toilets even for boys. Many may feel that this job is not worthy of a Prime Minister. But when I went into details, I found that this is a highly important job. However, for this I need help from every school of the country and all the teachers who are listening, for creating an enabling environment for this. I was there in Japan couple of days ago. An Indian family met me, the wife was Japanese and the husband who was Indian came to me and said that ‘I heard your Independence Day speech. You are insisting on cleanliness. There is a rule here in Japan that all of us, teachers and the students, together clean the school. Even the toilets are cleaned collectively. This is part of our character building in our school. Why is it not so in India?’ I said that I have to go back and ask mediapeople, otherwise it will run for 24 hours. Once, when I was in Gujarat, there was a programme on TV that was running that school children were cleaning the school. What kind of a school was that, what type of management was this, what teachers, exploitation of children! Anyway, I made light of that event. However, how will we make this a national trait. This can happen.
I call upon the senior people of the country. You may be doctors, lawyers, IAS officers or IPS officers. Can’t you identify a school nearby and volunteer to teach there for at least one period after deciding appropriate subject with the school. If every educated Indian volunteer for one period of teaching every week. Howsoever senior an officer, why can’t he or she can spend some time once in a week with children and teach them something. Please tell me if we agree that there are problems in the education system like lack of good teachers etc, can’t this be rectified. Why can’t we convert nation-building into a people’s movement? We should align everybody’s strength. We are not a country that should be left behind. We can go ahead a great deal. For this our emphasis should be on national character building. There should be collective efforts and this can be done.
As a student you might be having many dreams. I don’t believe that situations in life can stop anyone. If the determination is strong, then I believe that youngsters and children of this country have the strength and talent to move forward. Importance of technology is increasing day by day.
I will request all the teachers that if something is needed to be learnt, it should be learnt. We should keep on learning irrespective of our age being 40, 45 or 50. We are living with children who are growing in the age of technology. We should not keep them deprived from this. That will be a social crime. Our efforts should be that our children should be well versed with modern science and technology. The child should get ample opportunity to know the world in this form. This should be our effort.
Sometimes I ask this from children. I want to ask you also a question, will you reply? How many children sweat profusely four times in a day? How many? There is no one? If there is no sports in life, child will not bloom. This is a stage one should enjoy and spare time to sweat at least four times in a day. Will you do that? Are you sure? Your life should not be burdened with TV, books and computer. Life is also beyond these. We must have enjoyment in our lives. How many of you have hobby of reading books outside your curriculum? It seems there is a good number of such children. How many of you like to read autobiographies. It seems there are very few such children. I ask children to read biography of the person whom they like most. By reading biography we come closer to the history. We know the contemporary history by reading about the life of a person. It is not necessary that we should read a particular type of biography only. If someone wants to advance in sports he should read biography of the person from that field. If someone has done well in cinema and you get the chance to read his biography, you must read. If someone has done well in the field of business his biography should be read. It someone has worked as scientist his autobiography should be read. By reading biography we get the chance to come closer to the history and to understand what truth is. We should strive for that. Otherwise, everything is done by Google Guru and you have the habit to go to Google if you have a question. One gets the information but not the knowledge. I have been told some students have questions, I would like to chat with them. Make the atmosphere lighter, there is no need to remain serious. Your teacher might have told you not to put your hand in this manner, don’t do this. Have they told? You must follow instructions of your teacher but after leaving this place. Right now, be relaxed, then we will talk.
Again, I want to give you my best wishes. On the Teachers’ Day I salute all the teachers and give them my best wishes. Teachers have played a big role in building lives of many like us. I feel indebted for that.
Thank You
#DELIMITER#
15 8 2014, India
Independence Day
Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi addressed the nation from the ramparts of the Red Fort on the 68th Independence Day.
Following is the English rendering of the Prime Minister’s address on the occasion:
My dear countrymen,
Today, all Indians in the country and also abroad are celebrating the festival of independence. On this day of sacred festival of independence, the prime servant of India extends greetings to all dear countrymen.
I am present amidst you not as the Prime Minister, but as the Prime Servant. The freedom struggle was fought for so many years, so many generations laid down their lives, innumerable people sacrificed their lives and youth, spent their entire lives behind bars. Today, I pay my respect, greetings and homage to all those who laid their lives for the country's independence.
I also pay my respects to the crores of citizens of this country on the pious occasion of India's independence, and recall all those martyrs who had laid down their lives in India's struggle for freedom. The day of independence is a festival when we take a solemn pledge of working for the welfare of mother India, and also for the welfare of the poor, oppressed, dalits, the exploited & the backward people of our country.
My dear countrymen, a national festival is an occasion to refine and rebuild the national character. This National festival inspires us to resolve ourselves to lead a life where our character gets refined further, to dedicate ourselves to the nation and our every activity is linked to the interest of the nation and only then this festival of freedom can be a festival of inspiration to take India to newer heights.
My dear countrymen, this nation has neither been built by political leaders nor by rulers nor by governments. This nation has been built by our farmers, our workers, our mothers and sisters, our youth. The country has reached here today because of generation to generation rigours undertaken by our sages, our saints, our maestros, our teachers, our scientists and social workers. These great people and these great generations, who had worked for the country throughout their lives, deserve our deepest respect. This is the beauty of India's Constitution, this is its capability which has made it possible that today a boy from small town, a poor family has got the opportunity to pay homage to the tri-colour of India at the ramparts of 
Lal Quila (Red Fort). This is the strength of India's democracy. This is an invaluable legacy which we have inherited from our architects of the constitution. I pay my respects to those architects of the constitution of India today.
Brothers and sisters, today if we have reached here after independence, it is because of the contribution of all the Prime Ministers, all the governments and even the governments of all the States. I want to express my feelings of respect and gratitude to all those previous governments and ex-Prime Ministers who have endeavoured to take our present day India to such heights and who have added to the country's glory.
This country has been built on such foundation of ancient cultural heritage, where we were told of only one
mantra during 
Vedic period, which is indicative of our work culture, which we have learnt, we have memorized – “
Sangachchhdhvam Samvadadhvam sam wo manansi jaanataam.” We walk together, we move together, we think together, we resolve together and together we take this country forward. Having imbibed this basic mantra, 125 crores of countrymen have taken the nation forward. Yesterday only the first Parliamentary Session of the new Government had concluded. Today, I can proudly say that the Session of Parliament reflects our thinking and it is a reflection of our intentions. We are not for moving forward on the basis of majority, we are not interested to move forward by virtue of majority. We want to move ahead on the basis of strong consensus. 
"Sangachhadhwam" and, therefore, the nation has witnessed the entire Session of Parliament. Having taken all the Parties and Opposition along while working shoulder to shoulder, we achieved an unprecedented success and the credit for this does not go to the Prime Minister alone, the credit does not go to the people sitting in the Government, the credit for this goes to the Opposition also, the credit goes to all the leaders of Opposition too and also all the Members from Opposition. From the ramparts of Red Fort, quite proudly I salute all the Members of Parliament, I also salute all the Political Parties and by virtue of their strong support, we could take some important decisions intended to take the nation forward and yesterday the Session of Parliament had concluded.
Brothers and sisters, I am an outsider for Delhi, I am not a native of Delhi. I have no idea about the administration and working of this place. I have been quite isolated from the elite class of this place but during the last two months while being an outsider, I had an insider view and I was astonished. It is not a political platform, rather it is a platform of a national policy and, therefore, my views should not be evaluated from a political perspective. I have already said, I salute all the ex-Prime Ministers and earlier governments who have brought the country thus far. But I am going to say something else and it may not be seen from political point of view. When I came to Delhi and noticed an insider view, I felt what it was and I was surprised to see it. It seemed as if dozens of separate governments are running at the same time in one main government. It appeared that everyone has its own fiefdom. I could observe disunity and conflict among them. One department is taking on the other department and taking on to the extent that two departments of the same government are fighting against each other by approaching Supreme Court.This disunity, this conflict among people of the same country! How come we can take the country forward? And that is why I have started making efforts for razing those walls; I have started making efforts at making the Government,  not an assembled entity, but an organic unity, an organic entity, a harmonious whole- with one aim, one mind, one direction, one energy. Let's resolve to steer the country to one destination. We have it in us to move in that direction. A few days back...Nowadays newspapers are full of news that Modiji's Government has come, officers are reaching office on time, offices open in time, and people get there in time. I observed that India's National newspapers, TV media were carrying these news items prominently. As the Head of the Government I could have derived pleasure in the fact that everything started going on time, cleanliness got the attention, but I was not taking pleasure, I was feeling pained. That thing, I want to tell today in public. And why, because if government officers arrive office in time, does that make a news? And if that makes news, it shows how low we have fallen. It becomes a proof of that, and that's how, brothers and sisters, the governments have run? Today  in the face of global competition,  when we have to realize the dreams of millions of Indians,  the country cannot run on the lines of " it happens", " it goes". In order to fulfil the aspirations of masses, we have to sharpen the tool called the Government machinery, we have to make it keen, more dynamic, and it is in this direction that we are working. My countrymen, it's not long since I have come from outside Delhi, but I give you an assurance that the people in the Government are very capable - from the peon to the Cabinet Secretary, everybody is capable, everybody has a power, they have experience. I want to awaken that power, I want to unite that power and want to accelerate the pace of the welfare of nation through that power and I shall definitely do it. I want to assure the countrymen that we will achieve that, we will definitely do that. I could not say this on 16th May, but today after my experience of two-two and half months, keeping the tricolor as witness, I am saying on 15th of August that it is possible, it will be achieved.
Brothers and sisters, time has come to give a serious thought to the fact that whether we have a duty to create India of the dreams of those great people who gave us freedom, whether we have a national character?
Brothers and sisters, can someone please tell me as to whether he or she has ever introspected in the evening after a full day's work as to whether his or her acts have helped the poor of the country or not, whether his or her actions have resulted in safeguarding the interest of the country or not, whether the actions have been directed in country's welfare or not? Whether it should not be the motto of one and a quarter billion countrymen that every step in life should be in the country's interests? Unfortunately, we have an environment today wherein if you approach anyone with some work, he begins by saying "what does it mean for me?" He begins by saying "what does it involve for me?" and when he come to know that it does not entail any benefit for him, immediately he says "why should I bother?" we have to rise above the feelings of "what does it mean for me" and "why should I bother". Everything is not for self interest only. There are certain things which are meant for the country and we have to refine this national character. We have to rise above the feelings of "why should I bother" and "what does it mean for me" and instead we have to think that "I am for nation's interest and in this field, I am going to lead". We have to inculcate this sentiment.
Brothers and sisters, when we hear about the incidents of rape, we hang our heads in shame. People come out with different arguments, someone indulges in psycho analysis, but brothers and sisters, today from this platform, I want to ask those parents, I want to ask every parent that you have a daughter of 10 or 12 years age, you are always on the alert, every now and then you keep on asking where are you going, when would you come back, inform immediately after you reach. Parents ask their daughters hundreds of questions, but have any parents ever dared to ask their son as to where he is going, why he is going out, who his friends are. After all, a rapist is also somebody's son. He also has parents. As parents, have we ever asked our son as to what he is doing and where he is going. If every parent decides to impose as many restrictions on the sons as have been imposed on our daughters, try to do this with your sons, try to ask such questions of them.
My dear brothers and sisters, the law will take its own course, strict action will be taken, but as a member of the society, as parents, we also have some responsibilities. If somebody tells me that those who have taken guns on their shoulders and kill innocent people are maoists, are terrorists, but they are also somebody's children. I would like to ask of such parents if they had ever asked their children as to why they were taking a wrong path. Every parent must take this responsibility, he must know that his misguided son is bent on killing innocent people. He is not able to serve himself nor his family nor the country. I want to say to those youngsters who have chosen the path of violence that whatever they are and wherever they are, it is all because of mother India only that they have got it. Whoever you are it is all because of your parents. I want to ask you to think how green, how beautiful and how beneficial this earth can become if you shoulder the plough instead of the gun which spills blood on this land. How long shall we have bloodshed on this land, how long shall we take the lives of the innocent people and what have we got after all this? The path of violence has not yielded anything to us.
Brothers and sisters, I had gone to Nepal recently. There I said something publicly to draw the attention of the whole world. There was a time when the Emperor Ashoka who had chosen the path of wars, got converted to the path of Buddha at the sight of violence. There was a time in Nepal when their youngsters had opted for the path of violence but today I witness that the same youngsters are waiting for their constitution. The same people associated with them are framing the constitution. And I further said that if Nepal could present the best example of moving from the weapons to the books then it could provide inspiration to the youngsters in the world to abandon the path of violence.
Brothers and sisters, If Nepal, land of Budha, can give message to the world then why can't India too do the same? So it's the call of the hour that we renounce the path of violence and take the path of brotherhood.
Brothers and sisters, for one reason or the other, we have had communal tensions for ages. This led to the division of the country. Even after Independence, we have had to face the poison of casteism and communalism. How long these evils will continue? Whom does it benefit? We have had enough of fights, many have been killed. Friends, look behind and you will find that nobody has benefited from it. Except casting a slur on Mother India, we have done nothing. Therefore, I appeal to all those people that whether it is the poison of casteism, communalism, regionalism, discrimination on social and economic basis, all these are obstacles in our way forward. Let's resolve for once in our hearts, let's put a moratorium on all such activities for ten years, we shall march ahead to a society which will be free from all such tensions. And you will see that how much strength we get from peace, unity, goodwill and brotherhood. Let's experiment it for once.
My dear countrymen, believe in my words, I do assure you. Shun all the sins committed so far, give up that way, follow the way of goodwill and brotherhood, and let's resolve to take the country forward. I believe we can do that.
With advancement of science, brothers and sisters, we have a  rising feeling of modernity in our mind, but what do we do? Have we ever thought what the sex ratio in the country is like? 940 girls are born against per thousand boys. Who is causing this imbalance in the society? Certainly not God. I request the doctors not to kill the girl growing in the womb of a mother just to line their own pockets.  I advise mothers and sisters not to sacrifice daughters in the hope of son. Sometimes mother-father feel tempted to have son in the hope of supporting them in old age. I am a person who has worked in public life. I have come across families with five sons, each having bungalows, access to fleet of cars, but parents are forced to live in old-age homes, Vriddhashrams.  I have seen such families. I have also seen families with only daughter as progeny, that daughter sacrifices her dreams, doesn't get married, and spends entire life in taking care of old parents.  This disparity points to female foeticide and the polluted and tainted mind the 21st century has. We will have to liberate from it, and that is message to us of this Freedom festival.
Recently Commonwealth Games were organized. Indian sportspersons brought glory to the country. Nearly 64 of our sportspersons won. Our sportspersons brought 64 medals. But of them 29 are girls. Let's feel proud and clap for them. Girls also contribute to India's fame and glory. Let's recognise it. Let's take them along, shoulder to shoulder. This way we can get over the evils that have crept in social life. Therefore, brothers and sisters, we have to proceed in that direction as a social and national character. Brothers and Sisters, Development is the only way forward for the country. Good governance is the only way. There are only these two tracks to take the country forward - good governance and development, we can move forward only by taking them with us. We wish to move forward with the intent of taking them with us. When I talk of good governance, you tell me, when I ask a person in private job, he tells that he does the job; when you ask the same from a person in government job, he says that I do the service. Both earn, but for one it is job while for the other it is service. I ask a question from all brothers and sisters in government service, whether the word “Service” has not lost its strength, its identity? Persons in government service are not doing “job”, they are doing “service”. We have to revive this feeling, we have to take this feeling forward as a national character, we have to move forward in this direction.
Brothers and Sisters, whether the citizens of the country should take steps for the welfare of the nation or not? You imagine, if this 125 crores of countrymen move one step forward, then the country moves 125 crore steps forward. The meaning of democracy is not just limited to electing a government, but its meaning is that 125 crore of citizens work together joining shoulder with the government to fulfill hopes and aspirations of the country, this is the meaning of democracy. We have to create partnership with the people. We have to proceed under Public-Private Partnership. We have to proceed along with the participation of the people. But, please tell me why our farmers commit suicide? A farmer takes loan from the moneylender, but fails to repay his loans. He takes loan for the wedding of his daughter, but fails to repay. He will have to suffer hardships during his whole life. He chooses to commit suicide. Who will save the poor families of such farmers?
Brothers and sisters, I have come here with a pledge to launch a scheme on this festival of Freedom. It will be called
'Pradhanmantri Jan-Dhan Yojana'. I wish to connect the poorest citizens of the country with the facility of bank accounts through this 
yojana. There are millions of families who have mobile phones but no bank accounts. We have to change this scenario. Economic resources of the country should be utilized for the well-being of the poor. The change will commence from this point. This 
yojana will open the window. Therefore, an account holder under 
'Pradhanmantri Jan-Dhan Yojana' will be given a debit card. An insurance of One Lakh Rupees will be guaranteed with that debit card for each poor family, so that such families are covered with the insurance of One Lakh Rupees in case of any crisis in their lives.
My brothers and sisters, it is a country of young people. The 65 percent population of the country happens to be under the age of 35 years. Our country has the largest number of youths in the world. Have we ever thought of deriving an advantage out of it? Today, the world needs a skilled workforce. Today, India also needs a skilled workforce. At times, we look for a good driver but he is not available, we look for a plumber, but he is not available. If we need a good cook, he is not available. We have young people, they are unemployed but the kind of young people we seek for are not available. If we have to promote the development of our country then our mission has to be 'skill development' and 'skilled India'. Millions and Millions of Indian youth should go for acquisition of skills and there should be a network across the country for this and not the archaic systems. They should acquire the skills which could contribute towards making India a modern country. Whenever they go to any country in the world, their skills must be appreciated and we want to go for a two pronged development. I also want to create a pool of young people who are able to create jobs and the ones who are not capable of creating jobs and do not have the opportunities, they must be in a position to face their counterparts in any corner of the world while keeping their heads high by virtue of their hard work and their dexterity of hands and win the hearts of people around the world through their skills. We want to go for the capacity building of such young people. My brothers and sisters, having taken a resolve to enhance the skill development at a highly rapid pace, I want to accomplish this.
Brothers and sisters, the world has undergone a change. My dear countrymen, the world has changed. Now India can not decide its future by remaining isolated and sitting alone in a corner. The economics of the world have changed and, therefore, we will have to act accordingly. Government have taken many decisions recently, made some announcements in the budget and I call upon the world and call upon the Indians spread world over that if we have to provide more and more employment to the youth, we will have to promote manufacturing sector. If we have to develop a balance between imports and exports, we will have to strengthen manufacturing sector. If we have to put in use the education, the capability of the youth, we will have to go for manufacturing sector and for this Hindustan also will have to lend its full strength, but we also invite world powers. Therefore I want to appeal all the people world over, from the ramparts of the Red Fort, "Come, make in India", "Come, manufacture in India". Sell in any country of the world but manufacture here. We have got skill, talent, discipline, and determination to do something. We want to give the world an favourable opportunity that come here, "Come, Make in India" and we will say to the world, from electrical to electronics, "Come, Make in India", from automobiles to agro value addition "Come, Make in India", paper or plastic, "Come, Make in India", satellite or submarine "Come, Make in India". Our country is powerful. Come, I am giving you an invitation.
Brothers and sisters, I want to call upon the youth of the country, particularly the small people engaged in the industrial sector. I want to call upon the youth working in the field of technical education in the country. As I say to the world "Come, Make in India", I say to the youth of the country - it should be our dream that this message reaches every corner of the world, "Made in India". This should be our dream. Whether, to serve the country, is it necessary for the youth of the country to be hanged like Bhagat Singh? Brothers and sisters, Lal Bahadur Shastri had given the slogan "Jai Jawan, Jai Kisan". A soldier sacrifices himself at the border and protects Mother India. Similarly, a farmer serves Mother India by filling the godowns with grains. This is also nation's service. Filling the granary is the biggest nation's service that a farmer provides. That is why Lal Bahadur Shashtri had given the slogan of "Jai Jawan, Jai Kisan".
Brothers and Sisters, I would like to pose a question to my youngsters as to why despite them, we are forced to import even the smallest of things? My country's youth can resolve it, they should conduct research, try to find out as to what type of items are imported by India and then each one should resolve that, through may be micro or small industries only, he would manufacture atleast one such item so that we need not import the same in future. We should even advance to a situation wherein we are able to export such items. If each one of our millions of youngsters resolves to manufacture atleast one such item, India can become a net exporter of goods. I, therefore, urge upon the youth, in particular our small entrepreneurs that they would never compromise, atleast on two counts. First, zero defect and, second again zero effect. We should manufacture goods in such a way that they carry zero defect, that our exported goods are never returned to us. We should manufacture goods with zero effect that they should not have a negative impact on the environment. If we march ahead with the dream of zero defect in the manufacturing sector then, my brothers and sisters, I am confident that we would be able to achieve our goals.
Brothers and sisters, the youth of India has completely transformed the identity of India in the world. Earlier, in what manner did the world know our country?  Till only 25-30 years back, if not more, there were many people in the world who thought that India was a country of snake charmers, it was a country which practiced in black magic. The real identity of India had not reached the world, but my dear brothers and sisters, our youngsters, 20-22-23 years old youngsters have mesmerized the whole world with their skills in computers. Our young I.T. professionals have given a new path of making a new identity of India. If our country has this strength, can we think something about the country? Our dream is, therefore, of "Digital India". When I talk of "Digital India", I don't speak of the elite, it is for the poor people. You can imagine what a quality education the children in villages will get, if all the villages of India are connected with Broadband Connectivity and if we are able to give long distance education to the schools in every remote corner of the villages. If we create a network of telemedicine in the places where there is a shortage of doctors, we can have a clear guideline of the way in which health facilities have to be provided to the poor people living in those areas. The citizens of India have mobile phones in their hands, they have mobile connectivity, but can we walk in the direction of mobile governance? We have to move in a direction where every poor person is able to operate his bank account from his mobile, is able to demand various things from the government, can submit applications, can conduct all his business, while on the move, through mobile governance and if this has to be done, we have to move towards 'digital India' and if we have to move towards 'digital India' then we have a dream. Today we are importing electronic goods on a large scale. Friends, you will be surprised that we are bringing in these televisions, mobile phones, i-pads and all these electronic goods. It is a necessity to import petroleum products, oil, diesel and petrol. Second to this is the import of our electronic goods. If we move ahead with the dream of 'digital India' to manufacture electronic goods and become self reliant at least there, how big can be the benefit for the treasury! Therefore, e-governance is what we need to take this idea of 'digital India' forward. E-governance is easy governance, effective governance and also economic governance. E-governance paves the way for good governance. There was a time when we used to say that the railways provided connectivity to the country. That was it. I say that today it is IT that has the potential to connect each and every citizen of the country and that is why we want to realise the mantra of unity with the help of 'digital India'.
Brothers and sisters, if we move ahead with all this then I believe that a 'digital India' will have the potential to stand with the world on equal footing. Our youth have that capability, it is an opportunity for them.
Brothers and sisters, we want to promote tourism. Tourism provides employment to the poorest of the poor. Gram seller earns something, auto-rickshaw driver earns something, pakoda seller earns something and tea seller also earns something. When there is talk of tea seller, I feel a sense of belongingness. Tourism provide employment to the poorest of the poor. But there is a big obstacle in promoting tourism and in our national character and that is - the filthiness all around us. Whether after independence, after so many years of independence, when we stand at the threshold of one and half decade of 21st century, we still want to live in filthiness? The first work I started here after formation of Government is of cleanliness. People wondered whether it is a work of a Prime Minister? People may feel that it is a trivial work for a Prime Minister but for me this a big work. Cleanliness is very big work. Whether our country can not be clean? If one hundred and twenty five crore countrymen decide that they will never spread filthiness, which power in the world has ability to spread filthiness in our cities and villages? Can't we resolve this much?
Brothers and sisters it will be 150th birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi in 2019. How do we celebrate 150th birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi? Mahatma Gandhi, who gave us freedom, who brought so much honour to such a big country in the world, what do we give to Mahatma Gandhi? Brothers and Sisters, Mahatma Gandhi had cleanliness and sanitation closest to his heart. Whether we resolve not to leave a speck of dirt in our village, city, street, area, school, temple, hospital, and what have you,  by 2019 when we celebrate 150th anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi? This happens not just with the Government, but with public participation. That's why we have to do it together.
Brother and Sisters, we are living in 21st century. Has it ever pained us that our mothers and sisters have to defecate in open? Whether dignity of women is not our collective responsibility? The poor womenfolk of the village wait for the night; until darkness descends, they can't go out to defecate. What bodily torture they must be feeling, how many diseases that act might engender. Can't we just make arrangements for toilets for the dignity of our mothers and sisters? Brothers and Sisters, somebody might feel that a big festival like 15th August is an occasion to talk big. Brothers and Sisters, talking big has its importance, making announcements too has importance, but sometimes announcements raise hopes and when the hopes are not fulfilled, the society sinks into a state of despondency. That's why are in favour of telling those things, which we can fulfil just within our sight. Brothers and sisters, you must be getting shocked to hear the Prime Minister speaking of cleanliness and the need to build toilets from the ramparts of the Red Fort. Brothers and sisters, I do not know how my speech is going to be criticised and how will people take it. But this is my heartfelt conviction. I come from a poor family, I have seen poverty. The poor need respect and it begins with cleanliness. I, therefore, have to launch a 'clean India' campaign from 2nd October this year and carry it forward in 4 years. I want to make a beginning today itself and that is - all schools in the country should have toilets with separate toilets for girls. Only then our daughters will not be compelled to leave schools midway. Our parliamentarians utilizing MPLAD fund are there. I appeal to them to spend it for constructing toilets in schools for a year. The government should utilise its budget on providing toilets. I call upon the corporate sector also to give priority to the provision of toilets in schools with your expenditure under Corporate Social Responsibility. This target should be finished within one year with the help of state governments and on the next 15th August, we should be in a firm position to announce that there is no school in India without separate toilets for boys and girls.
Brothers and sisters, if we proceed with the dreams, we are in a position to realise them. Today, I wish to tell one more specific thing. It has its own importance to discuss the matters and express the views of nation's interest. However, our Members of Parliament do not get opportunity though they are willing to do something. They can express themselves, write to the government, agitate, give memoranda. Still they do not get opportunity to do something on their own. Today I have come to you with a new idea. We are running so many schemes in the name of the Prime Minister in our country, there are numerous schemes in the name of various leaders. However, today I am going to announce a scheme on behalf of the Member of Parliament- 
'Sansad Aadarsh Gram Yojana'. We shall fix some parameters. I urge upon the Members of Parliament to select any one of the villages having population of three to five thousand in your constituency. The parameters will be according to the time, space and situation of that locality. It will include the conditions of health, cleanliness, atmosphere, greenery, cordiality etc. On the basis of those parameters, each of our MPs should make one village of his or her constituency a Model Village by 2016. Can't we do at least this? Shouldn't we do this? If we have to build a nation, we should start from the village. Make a Model Village. The reason of fixing this target for 2016 is that it is a new scheme. It takes time to formulate a scheme and then to implement it. After 2016, select two more villages for this purpose, before we go for the General Elections in 2019. And after 2019, each Member of Parliament, during his/her tenure of 5 years must establish at-least five model villages in his/her area. I also call upon the Members of Parliament from urban areas to adopt one village of their choice. I also urge upon the Members of Parliament from Rajya Sabha to adopt one of the villages. If we provide one model village in each district of India then the surrounding villages shall be automatically inspired to follow that model. Let us establish a model village, let us establish a village well equipped with all systems and facilities. The birth anniversary of Jai Prakash Narayan Ji happens to be on 11th October. On 11th October, the occasion of birth anniversary of Jai Prakash Narayan Ji, I will present a complete blueprint of 
"S
ānsad Adharsh Gr
ām Yojana" (Members of Parliament Model Village Scheme) before all Members of Parliament and State Governments, and I urge upon State Governments also that as per the feasibility in their respective states, all the Members of Legislative Assembly resolve to establish a model village. You can imagine all the Members of Legislative Assembly and all the Members of Parliament in the country establishing a model village. All of a sudden, there would be a model village in each block of India which could inspire us to transform the amenities in rural areas and could give us a new direction and, therefore, we want to move ahead under this
"S
ānsad Adarsh Gr
ām Yojana".
My dear brothers and sisters, ever since our government has taken charge, there has been a discussion in the newspapers, on T.V. channels as to what would happen to Planning Commission. I believe that when Planning Commission was constituted, it was done on the basis of the circumstances and the needs of those times. In recent years, Planning Commission has contributed to the growth of the country in its own way. I respect that, I am proud of that, but the prevalent situation in the country is different, global scenario has also changed, governments are no longer the centre of economic activities, the scope of such activities has broadened. State governments have been at the center of development and I consider this a good indication. If we have to take India forward, it can happen only be taking the states forward.  India's federal structure is more important today than in the last 60 years. To strengthen our federal structure, to make our federal structure vibrant, to take our federal structure as a heritage of development, a team of Chief Minister and Prime Minister should be there, a joint team of the Centre and the states should move forward, then to do this job, we will have to think about giving the Planning Commission a look. So, I am saying from the rampart of the Red Fort that it is a very old system and it will have to be rejuvenated, it will have to be changed a lot. Sometimes it costs more to repair the old house, but, it gives us no satisfaction. Thereafter, we have a feeling that it would be better to construct a new house altogether and therefore within a short period, we will replace the planning commission with a new institution having a new design and structure, a new body, a new soul, a new thinking, a new direction, a new faith towards forging a new direction to lead the country based on creative thinking, public-private partnership, optimum utilization of resources, utilization of youth power of the nation, to promote the aspirations of state governments seeking development, to empower the state governments and to empower the federal structure. Very shortly, we are about to move in a direction when this institute would be functioning in place of Planning Commission.
Brothers and sisters, today, on 15th August, we also have the birth anniversary of Maharishi Aurobindo. Maharishi Aurobindo, being a rebel, moved on to achieve the status of a Yoga Guru. With regard to the destiny of India, he remarked, "I have a faith that the divine power and spiritual heritage of India will play an important role towards the welfare of the world." Such sentiments were echoed by Maharishi Arvind. I strongly believe in the words of legends. I have great faith in the statements made by ascetics, sages & saints and that’s why today at the ramparts of Lal Quila I am reminded of the words of Swami Viveknanda. He had said - "I can see before my eyes Mother India awakening once again. My Mother India would be seated as the World Guru. Every Indian would render service towards welfare of humanity. This legacy of India would be useful for the welfare of the world". These words were spoken by Swami Viveknanda ji in his own style. Friends, the words of Viveknanda ji can never be untrue. The words of Viveknanda ji, his dream of seeing India ensconced as World Guru, his vision, it is incumbent upon us to realize that dream. This capable country, blessed with natural bounty, this country of youth can do much for the world in the coming days.
Brothers and sisters, our foreign policy is a much talked about issue. I clearly believe that India's foreign policy can be multi-dimensional. But there is an important issue to which I want to draw your attention that the way we fought for freedom, we fought together, we were not separate at that time. We were together. Which was the government with us? What were the weapons available to us? There was a Gandhi, a Sardar and lakhs of freedom fighters and such a huge empire. Didn't we win in the struggle of freedom against that empire? Did we not defeat the foreign powers? Did we not force them to leave India? We were the ones, they were our ancestors only who showed this might. If the people of India could remove such a big empire without the power of the government, without weapons and even without resources, then friends, it is the need of the hour to eradicate poverty, can we not overcome poverty? Can we not defeat poverty? My 125 crore dear countrymen, let us resolve to eradicate poverty, to win against it. Let us move with the dream of poverty eradication from India. Our neighbouring countries are also faced with the same problem. Why not get together with all the SAARC nations to plan out the fight against poverty? Let's fight together and defeat poverty. Let us see at-least for once as to how wonderful is the feeling of being alive instead of killing and getting killed. This is the land where incidents from Siddharth's life happened. One bird was shot with an arrow by one brother and the other took out that arrow to save it. They went to mother- whose bird, whose swan? Whether killer's or saviour's, they asked of mother. The mother replied, saviour's. The saviour has more power than the killer and that makes him Buddha in future. And that's why I seek cooperation from neighbouring countries for fighting against poverty in concert and cooperate with them, so that together with SAARC countries we can create our importance and emerge as a power in the world. It is imperative that we work together with a dream to win a fight against poverty, shoulder to shoulder. I went to Bhutan, Nepal, all the dignitaries from SAARC countries took part in oath-taking ceremony; this marked a good beginning. This will definitely yield good results, it is my belief and this thinking of India, in the country and the world, that we want to do well to the countrymen and be useful for the welfare of the world, India wants such a hand to be extended. We are trying to move forward with these dreams to achieve them.
Brothers and Sisters, today on 15th August we will resolve to do something for the country. Let's be useful for the country, we will move ahead with a resolve to take the country forward, and I assure you, Brothers and Sisters, as well as my colleagues in the Government, that if you work for 12 hours, I will do so for 13 hours. If you work for 14 hours, I will do for 15 hours. Why? Because I'm amidst you not as a Prime Minister, but as the first servant. I have formed the Government not as a ruler, but as a servant. Brothers and sisters, I assure that this country has a destiny. It is destined to work for the welfare of the world, it was said by Vivekanand ji. India is born, this Hindustan is born in order to achieve this destiny. One hundred and twenty five crore countrymen have to move forward wholeheartedly for the welfare of the nation.
Once again I feel proud of the devotion, the sacrifices of the security forces of the country, para-military forces of the country, all the security forces of the country to protect Mother India. I say to the countrymen, "राष्ट्रयाम, जाग्रयाम् वयम्", "Eternal vigilance is the price of liberty". The army is vigilant, we should also be vigilant and the country scales new heights, we have to move forward with this resolution. Speak loudly with me with full force -
Bharat mata ki jai, bharat mata ki jai, bharat mata ki jai.
Jai Hind, Jai Hind, Jai Hind.
Vande Mataram, Vande Mataram, Vande Mataram!
#DELIMITER#
12 8 2014, India
Outstanding Parliamentary Awards Ceremony
His Excellency President of India, respected Vice President, respected Speaker, Respected Manmohan Singh ji, respected Advani ji, all present respected senior gentlemen, brothers and sisters. I heartily congratulate all the three great gentlemen who are being felicitated for their excellent work. I am hopeful that this tradition being followed for the past few years will inspire all the parliamentarians. Each one will feel that in their respective roles as parliamentarians one should try and achieve high levels of conduct, depth in speech and clarity in thought as maintained by these great senior members. These kinds of thoughts would inspire all new members like us.
I agree that there are lot of intellectual talent in the house and I see people who are capable of presenting their word beautifully but the house cannot run as an ornate articulation or as a remarkable art of presentation. Till there is a seamless integration of leadership, duty and oration, just the words will fail to make an impact on the house or inspire the nation. And so those who won these awards today are the ones who have not only been good orators but are equally capable leaders and dutiful members. The country expects a lot from the Parliament of India. We give the awards within the parliament, But sometime there should be a public survey, on how the public rates the house and in a very professional way the public opinion should be presented. How does the common man view the entire house, what does he feel, maybe that may inspire us to think our way forward. 
I would request the speaker to call the speakers of all Vidhan Sabhas if possible and start this tradition in the state assemblies too. I think this will be a good step that we can take. Another thing I would like to point out is that when I was in the Vidhan Sabha and now for some time when I have been in Parliament, the humour and sarcasm which was an explicit feature is now missing, something that we have heard and read so much about. It has practically vanished from our party system. One reason someone makes a remark, then how will those who are on air 24 hours interpret it and will they debate this for 24 hours. So, the ones who can speak are scared and I think we need to seriously contemplate on this.
I have heard of old incidents, of which I remember two or three episodes. Once there was a programme in the house to commemorate the 50 years of Independence. I had come to the house to hear it and some debate was going on and probably Sharad Pawar ji spoke first and then Sushma ji spoke. She joked and said “I don’t understand whether it is Sharad Pawar or Lalita Pawar”. The way I saw that scene, the way Sharad Pawar enjoyed that jibe, such a holy atmosphere prevailed. And that remark was not blown out of proportion by anyone in the print media or the electronic media. There is a casual sense of humour in our Parliament. And as our honourable Speaker and Arun Jaitely ji mentioned, sharp words can get you 24 hour footage but it can neither be effective nor inspirational. 
That does not mean that everything should be done sweetly. That is not what I am saying. The need of the hour is to present the Parliament in a way that it becomes inspirational for the future generations. Every sentence uttered in the Parliament has its value, that it should not be undignified. And this is a collective responsibility. This is our collective responsibility, it is not about this political party, that political party, or about this or that specific individual but it is about our collective responsibility. 
Dr. Karan Singh is a very experienced individual. He is still bound by the cultural traditions. Whatever disappointments he has shared, I am sure they will be helpful in self introspection. For a distinguished person like him who for so many years has served the nation through this Parliament, to know his pain, to understand his disappointment and then to modulate as per his hopes and expectations will usher in a new dignity in the house. I congratulate these three dignitaries once again. 
I am new to the parliament. I also have to learn a lot. There are so many senior members, and by hearing them and understanding their views, I too will gain something. Sharad Ji said that once if he sits down to chat with the President he does not feel like getting up. I am telling you the truth. He gives such a lot of information with date and time and name, it is surprising. Like Sharad ji said, he wonders what kind of software does the President has in his mind. He said that what one would gain after reading an entire book, more than that one would have acquire half of the knowledge about India can be understood by having a conversation with him. Every parliamentarian should have the intention to remember dates, events, analysis of the situation and an ability to grasp things. All these can be learned from these seasoned members. And it is true that “Clarity of the Thought, Faith in Conviction and Correction in Acts” can help us take the dignity of the Parliament to a new level. I congratulate you once again. 
Thank You!
#DELIMITER#
12 8 2014, India
Address to soldiers, officers, warriors at Leh
National Security Advisor Shri Ajit Doval ji, Chief of Army Staff General Dalbir Singh ji, Lieutenant General Hooda ji, Air Marshal Soman ji and all the brave officers and soldiers of the army and air force present here. I am privileged to address those who are associated with defence forces and I believe in military, bravery is respected more than the position one holds.
Army follows a hierarchical system but courage is a tradition and for those who serve this tradition in an exemplary manner particularly wait for that moment when they will be called for serving their nation and they live for that tradition every moment. This in itself is a distinct feeling. For the soldiers, there is only one yearning in life, to work and serve the country. You can see a feeling of restlessness in a soldier who has retired from army but has not faced any challenges during his service and if fielded a similar question about his service in army. He will tend to think that though he has participated in the daily parade but has not contributed to the force. For him in his heart the meaning of work in the army is not to kill someone or to be killed, the biggest inspiration for a soldier is to dedicate his life for someone else’s life.
The respect of your mother who gave birth to you is million times more than what you can have. I salute those mothers who gave birth to such brave warriors and instilled the right values in them and also instilled a do and die inspiration for their motherland India. I am not aware of a single mother who has feeling in her heart that though she has given birth to a son but he dedicates his life only for serving motherland India and not his own mother. This extraordinary inspiration can only be given by a mother and due to this your life not only secures our national borders but also provides assurance of security to 125 million people. If you ask what are the dreams of those 125 million people then they will say that our motherland should either become a Vishwa Guru (Teacher of the World) or a Jagat Janani (Provider of the World). Our 125 million brothers and sisters want to live a happy and peaceful life, even poorest of the poor child should not sleep hungry at night and at least there should be one roof above their head with a proper access to education. That is the reason I am saying that you all are not just for protection of border or for the protection of geographical structure. Your life in an indirect way is the guarantee of millions of life. And until there is peace and security in the country development is impossible.
The preconditions of development are peace, security, brotherhood, goodwill. Our army is an example of brotherhood - there is no distinction on the basis of language, wealth and there is a feeling of being a family. The term Fauji (soldier) in itself seems like you are a very own part of the system which you can relate to and this honour does not come overnight.  These get developed under a certain tradition and this feeling comes when every moment this tradition is kept alive.
An army cannot be made capable unless the systems behind it are well accomplished. The term planning here is not restricted to the cantonment or the government, but also towards his village and family which particularly need to be strengthened. The soldier must have faith that even if he sacrifices his life for the country, the country will take care of his family and leave any stone unturned for his family’s well-being. It is the responsibility of the country and government that the faith vested in it should not be shaken. There should not be any question mark in the mind of the soldier posted on the border.
In the political field, I used to work for an organization. I came quite late in the world of electoral politics and governance. I have utlilised my earlier life in mobilizing the cadres. Whenever I addressed my party workers, I used to tell them because we live in an atmosphere of electoral politics, party workers tend to seek ticket for election and if they are denied the same they ought to get frustrated due to it and feeling of even doing something incorrect creeps inside the mind. This is a normal course of political field.  During training, I used to tell my party workers a story, which I want to share with you all. I used to tell them that when an army soldier wants to take leave on the occasion of festival of Raksha Bandhan (sister tying rakhi or a thread at the wrist of her brother for her protection). He is normally sanctioned the leave at the last moment.  He somehow packs his round luggage and rushes for his home. In order to reach the nearest railway station, he takes whatever first mode of transport comes his way, whether its truck or tempo. Due to last minute rush, the passengers do not allow him to enter in a coach as he does not have reservation for travel. You can image the similar scenario of fight everyday at Jammu station.  The soldier does not get a place to sit as people here are used to soldiers on a daily basis so he stands for twenty four hours, thirty hours, sixty hours on the train without reservation to reach home. If in some case, he misses the train though he has left with the dream of getting rakhi tied by his sister but reaches home a day late. In the interim before he reaches home due to delay his sister is waiting and the soldier travelling in the train has the image of his sister. He can see the Rakhi but cannot not reach home on time and feels mental agony. When he reaches home, his mother, daughter, sister… all are crying and upon tying of Rakhi, there is a sense of happiness. Mother is sick so he tries to extend his leave but leave is not approved, so he comes back and resumes duty. Mother has to be operated he goes again. For operation he wanders from the house of one doctor to other and the doctor demands money in advance. He does not have so much of money with him. At that time, the he is annoyed. Can he not see, I am a soldier serving my nation and here my mother is dying and he is not doing the operation for want of money? Child wants to go to school but the school is not giving him admission. A soldier wants his child to get a good education even though he has studied in a simple school but the school wants ex amount of fee to admit the child. He is very annoyed, when he thinks about the doctor who has not treated his mother, towards the school who denied admission to his child and towards the rail system which does not allow him to reach on time on the occasion of Rakhi. When he gets the news, that his mother was not operated and she died, so many negative things cross his mind. If he analyzes the event one by one, then he feels, for whom should I lay my life? Should I die for the people, who are not admitting my child to the school? These are the people who were not performing the operation in hospital, when my mother was dying, why should I lay my life for them? After seeing all this also just see the strength of the soldier, see his temperament, see his upbringing, whenever the situation arises and the bugle rings, he still puts the gun on his shoulder and says ”Bharat Maata Ki Jai’’ (hail Mother India) and marches ahead. He never thinks, what the Doctor did to his mother, what the teacher did to his child or whether he reached on time on the day of Rakhi or not, he chants the mantra of Love Live Mother India and marches forward to the action scene. This is not a small gesture, this is not an usual thing. I would tell my party workers that we must take inspiration from these soldiers. These soldiers never get the respect and honour that they deserve but when it is required they serve their ‘Motherland India’ they put the gun on their shoulders, chant ”Bharat Maata Ki Jai’’ (hail Mother India) and march ahead. This temperament, this strength is essential for the protection of dignity, self-esteem and the pride of the nation and India takes pride in the fact that we have such an outstanding army.
Whether it is navy, land or air, we have a chain of proud, daredevil, devout, soldiers who are ready to sacrifice their lives and this brings a sense of pride in us. Whenever, I come to meet them, I get an inspiration to serve my country even more. I have not come here to tell you all this, I used to be amongst you all when I was the Chief Minister of Gujarat, as I used to visit the border to celebrate Diwali there. I went there not to tell anything to them but to get my battery of patriotism charged a little more, because I know your life will provide us the inspiration. Army soldiers do not want to distance themselves from the society in general but want to have coordination with them and that gives strength. Had there been no coordination between the people of Leh and Ladakh and the army soldiers and had a Tashi-Nagia shepherd who herds cow and sheep not met an army officer then we would have not known of the Kargil infiltration of the Pakistan army for a long time. Due to the information received from a local shepherd who grazed cow, buffalo and goat informed army soldiers, awakening the nation about the impending war which we resultantly won.
In today’s age, the wars on the fought on the borders have almost stopped. It is our misfortune that that our given our neighbour’s mentality of having lost the strength to fight a conventional war but the chain of killing innocent civilians continues unabated through the Proxy War waged. How many innocent people are being killed due to this? These cowards have forced our soldiers to sacrifice their lives due to this proxy war than fighting the actual war. The proxy war is not just a crisis in India but it has engulfed the whole world. Therefore, as much there is a need for military power in the world, the requirement of humanitarian forces to come together against this menace is important. The more world's humanitarian powers come together, more they will be able to alienate the violent forces, the humanitarian forces will defeat the violent forces. We are dedicated to the protection of humanitarian thoughts, humanitarian values, humanitarian strengths and the civilized tradition.  And for this India is bound by its words, duty and commitment and we want to move forward with this belief.
You might have seen the new budget, the "One Rank, One Pension’’ scheme showed our commitment and made you happy. After independence the soldiers of our country were awaiting for the National War Memorial to be constructed. I promise you that it will be made and it will be made with lot of honour and pride and millions of people from India will take inspiration from it. It is for those people who lived for us and died for us and this will continue to inspire us forever. Our armed forces should be modern and our armed forces should not lack any required resources and India should become self-reliant in the field of security. I have taken a very big decision in the budget for it. Why can’t we arrange to make everything within India than bringing them from outside our country? In defence, FDI should come, new technology should come and the defence equipment should be made in India utilizing our current serving defence personnel that include engineers, technical staff and skilled personnel.  We are working towards the deployment of retired defence personnel in the defence manufacturing system to utilize their strength, on how to utilize the foreign funds and how to provide the best of best defence safeguard mechanism and we are moving towards it in a much planned way.
I once again, through this brave soldier in whose name this building has been named convey my respect and tribute to all the martyrs. I am proud of your duty, skill and courage and as your leader, I assure you that this country is for you and will always be proud of your sacrifice and timeless effort. My best wishes to you all. Please speak after me – Long Live Mother India, Vande Matram, Vande Mataram, Vande Mataram, Vande Mataram, Vande Mataram, Vande Mataram!
#DELIMITER#
2 8 2014, India
Prior to Nepal Visit
I am visiting Nepal from 3 to 4 August 2014 at the invitation of the Government of Nepal. I am excited about my visit and pleased that I am able to go there within weeks of assuming office as Prime Minister. 
My visit reflects our shared heritage of nature, history, culture, spiritualism and religion. It highlights the high priority that my Government attaches to our relations with Nepal and our determination to take our relationship to an entirely new level. 
My visit will be the first bilateral visit by an Indian Prime Minister to Nepal in 17 years. 
I was delighted that Prime Minister Sushil Koirala had graced my swearing in ceremony with his presence, which demonstrated the solidarity of the people of Nepal with India and our shared commitment to democracy. The India-Nepal Joint Commission Meeting chaired by our respective Foreign Ministers also met recently after a long gap of 23 years and reviewed the entire gamut of our bilateral relations and cooperation with a focus on economic relations, trade and connectivity. 
During my visit, I will have the opportunity to hold detailed discussions with the Nepalese leadership on the entire gamut of bilateral relations. I look forward to working with the leadership of Nepal to forge a new relationship for the new century between our two rapidly transforming countries. 
We will identify steps to strengthen our bilateral cooperation in key sectors, including trade and investment, hydro power, agriculture and agro-processing, environment, tourism, education, culture and sports. I will also discuss with Nepali leadership and their business leaders how we can harness the full potential of the new digital age to empower and create new opportunities for the youth of the two countries. 
Nepal has made admirable progress in its peace process and political transition towards a multiparty democracy. The successful conduct of the Constituent Assembly-cum-Parliamentary elections in November 2013 is yet another tribute to the sagacity of the Nepalese leadership and the people of Nepal. I am truly grateful to the people and the elected representatives of Nepal for giving me the rare honour of addressing the Parliament of Nepal. 
As a close friend and neighbour, we have had the privilege of being a leading partner in Nepal`s socio-economic development. We are committed to continuing our support to Nepal in its development efforts. Our ongoing major projects for development of border infrastructure will usher in economic prosperity to people living on both sides of the border and also enhance connectivity. During the visit, we will explore the ways to further strengthen our development cooperation. 
I will also discuss with the Nepalese leadership the steps to further strengthen people-to-people contacts between our countries, and how to connect lives across our open borders more seamlessly, particularly among the youth. 
I hope my visit will open a new chapter in India -Nepal relations, characterized by more frequent political engagement and closer cooperation across the full spectrum of our extraordinarily broad-based relations, which will serve as a model and catalyst for South Asian partnership for prosperity. 
#DELIMITER#
16 7 2014, Brazil
BRICS Summit, meeting with South American leaders
Your Excellencies, the Presidents of BRICS countries 
Your Excellencies, the Presidents of South American Countries 
Distinguished Delegates 
I thank Brazil, for providing this opportunity, to interact with leaders, from South American countries. I am grateful, to Your Excellencies, for sparing your valuable time, to meet us today. South America, has tremendous potential. It is blessed, with vast resources and talent. It can become an important pillar of the global economy. In the face of economic uncertainty its growth can be crucial for global prosperity. In a globalised and inter-connected world, our destinies are inter-linked. We are all bound, by shared aspirations and common challenges. We all have a stake in each other's success. Distance is not a barrier to opportunities. It also does not, insulate us from challenges in other parts of the world. 
Thus, we must all unite: 
To seek faster growth and newer avenues of generating prosperity. 
To find solutions to the challenge of poverty. 
To preserve our environment, and use our resources well. 
Our discussions today should throw up new ideas for partnership between BRICS and South America. BRICS nations have already started a new chapter in this with the BRICS New Development Bank. This will open up newer opportunities of cooperation. 
Excellencies, India and South America share a deep bond. 
Authors and poets, like Octavio Paz, Gabriel Garcia Marquez and Pablo Neruda are popular in India. Similarly, our national poet, Rabindranath Tagore, is widely loved here. South America is also home to a large number of Indians, many of whom came centuries ago. Generations later, they remain a strong bridge of friendship, between our nations. 
Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi meeting the President of the Republic of Peru, Mr. Ollanta Humala
Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi meeting the President of the Republic of Peru, Mr. Ollanta Humala

My own home state of Gujarat has many links with South America:
Ages ago, the Gir cow made its way from Gujarat, all the way to Brazil. Today Gujarat accounts for more than half of India's trade, with this wonderful continent.
Excellencies, as Chief Minister of Gujarat, I also had the privilege, to interact with your Ambassadors in Delhi. 
Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi meeting the President of Co-operative Republic of Guyana, Mr. Donald Ramotar

I was struck by their warmth, and their keen desire to forge closer relations, between India and South America. 
I assure you that India will work more closely with South America than ever before. At the bilateral level, as a BRICS member, in the G-77, as well as other international forums. 
Excellencies, India's trade with South America, has shown strong growth in recent years. 
Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi meeting the President of the Republic of Suriname, Mr. Desi Bouterse

There is a growing presence, of Indian investors in South America. It is, however, still well below potential. From hydrocarbons to pharma, textiles to leather, engineering goods to automobiles; the range of opportunities is enormous.We must utilize, the Preferential Trade Agreement between India and the MERCOSUR Trade Block, and Chile, more effectively. We also attach importance, to the South American and Caribbean Business Conclave held every year in India. A similar Investment Conclave, is being organized in October 2014, in India. I ask your Excellencies, to encourage your business leaders, to take full advantage of this opportunity. 
I firmly believe, the possibilities of cooperation are limited not by distance but only by our imagination and efforts.We have much to learn from each other, in our journey towards inclusive and sustainable development. We must share with each other, our experiences, best practices and innovative solutions. India stands committed to the same. I am pleased, that India has deputed experts, to countries in the South American region in the fields of Agriculture, Horticulture, Disaster Management, Communications and Law. We are also working together in Renewable Energy.
Almost 250 students from South America, have been taking courses in India every year under our International Technical and Economic Cooperation program. I however believe, that this is not enough. We intend to substantially increase the same.
To share India's expertise in Information Technology, we will establish Centres of Excellence in Information Technology, in South American countries.
India also offers to expand cooperation, in areas like Tele-medicine, Tele-education and e-Governance. We extend our Space capabilities, for weather forecasting, resource mapping and disaster management. Our ongoing Parliament session in Delhi – my Government's first – prevents me from spending more time here, on this visit. But, I look forward to returning to this great continent; of beauty, opportunities and warm people. I also look forward, to a much more intensive level of engagement, between India and South America, in the coming years, across all domains of cooperation 
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
16 7 2014, Brazil
BRICS Summit
Your Excellency, President Dilma Rousseff 
Your Excellency, President Vladimir Putin 
Your Excellency, President Xi Jinping 
Your Excellency, President Jacob Zuma 
Distinguished delegates, ladies, and gentlemen 
I am delighted to be in Brazil. I thank President Rousseff, the Government, and the wonderful people of Brazil for their hospitality. 
This is my first BRICS summit and it has been a truly enriching experience. I have gained a lot from the insight and vision of the World Leaders gathered here. 
I have also had the privilege of sowing the seeds of personal relationships with each of the leaders. I look forward to seeing them blossom into deep and strong personal bonds in the days to come. 
Excellencies, BRICS enters the second cycle of its summits today. 
This Summit takes place at a crucial juncture. The World is facing a high level of economic and political turmoil. Conflict and instability is growing in many key regions. 
This increases the challenges of tackling poverty, making growth more inclusive, and evolving a sustainable model of development. 
Restoring a climate of peace and stability is an urgent global need. This calls for newer avenues of cooperation and collaboration. 
I believe BRICS can answer this call. This I do because of the uniqueness of BRICS as an international institution. For the first time it brings together a group of nations on the parameter of ‘future potential’; rather than existing prosperity or shared identities. The very Idea of BRICS is thus forward-looking. 
I therefore believe it can add fresh perspectives and mechanisms, to existing international institutions. 
Thus, we must ensure that the future development of our partnerships, and institutions, stays true to this original idea. 
BRICS must provide a united and clear voice in shaping a peaceful, balanced and stable World. 
We should intensify our cooperation in confronting global challenges; like Terrorism, Cyber Security and Climate Change. 
BRICS must also play a proactive role in shaping the global discourse on Growth and Development. This includes shaping the post-2015 Development Agenda to keep the central focus on tackling Poverty. 
We must seek urgent reforms of global institutions of governance like the UN Security Council and international financial institutions. 
We must help shape the WTO regime. An open trading regime is critical for strong, balanced and sustainable global economic growth. 
This must address the development aspirations of the developing world. 
It must also accommodate the special needs of the weak especially in areas such as Food Security. 
Excellencies, BRICS has gained enough horizontal influence to compel the world to take notice. Our own greater good, however, lies more in deepening our bonds vertically. 
This is why I have spoken on decentralizing this powerful forum in our earlier deliberations. We must proactively move beyond being Summit-centric. 
We must champion Sub-national Level exchanges. Champion engagement between our States, Cities and other local bodies. 
BRICS should in fact, be driven by ‘People to People’ contact. Our Youth in particular must take a lead in this. BRICS should explore developing innovative mechanisms of Youth engagement. A possible initiative, could focus on nurturing Innovation, by establishing a BRICS Young Scientists’ Forum. 
Another possibility, could be the setting up of BRICS language schools; offering language training in each of our languages. 
We could, also consider establishing, Massive Open Online Courses, for making quality education, accessible to all. 
We could also explore setting up a BRICS University. This would connect campuses in each of our countries; virtually, as well as through intensive student, faculty and research collaboration. 
Excellencies, I am convinced that each of us can succeed more by working together more closely. 
We must harness each other’s strengths, in knowledge, skills and resources. 
We must evolve mechanisms to share our experiences, innovations and technology. Numerous avenues can be explored, such as: 
• Sharing our experiences on development of affordable and reliable Clean Energy technologies.
• Harnessing advanced technology, like satellite communication, to make quality Health and Education more accessible. 
• Developing a Framework for promoting Tourism among BRICS countries. 
• Sharing experiences on Disaster Management, and 
• Collaboration and Competitions in Sports 
Excellencies, Economic forces are becoming increasingly important in global relationships. Domains like; Trade, Tourism, Technology, Tradition and Talent; have the power, to redefine existing paradigms. 
Each of us in BRICS brings a unique blend of experience and resources. We represent four continents. Each one of us enjoys comparative advantages and complementary strengths. BRICS should develop mechanisms to harness the same; for furthering our combined as well as individual good. Great work has already been done in this domain. 
The vision of a New Development Bank, at the Delhi Summit two years ago, has been translated into a reality, in Fortaleza. It will benefit BRICS nations. But will also support other developing nations. And, it will be rooted in our own experiences, as developing countries. 
The BRICS Contingent Reserve Arrangement gives BRICS nations a new instrument for safeguarding their economic stability. This is an important initiative at a time of high volatility in global financial markets. 
The MoU on Cooperation between Export Credit Guarantee Agencies, and the inter-Bank Cooperation Agreement on Innovation are other tangible steps that will spur cooperation among BRICS countries. 
I believe we have now reached a level where we should be even more ambitious.We should focus on more such tangible mechanisms and outcomes. Make BRICS a platform of Impact. 
Excellencies, we have an opportunity, to define the future – of not just our countries, but the world at large. Coming from a land where the idea of Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam - the ‘whole world being one family’ - is rooted deep in our ethos; I take this is as a great responsibility. 
Our steps must reinforce the hopes, aspirations and confidence, of the developing world. 
Once again, I thank President Rousseff and the wonderful people of Brazil, for hosting this Summit.
#DELIMITER#
16 7 2014, Brazil
BRICS Business Council
Excellencies, 
Distinguished members of the Business Council 
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I believe, economic forces are becoming increasingly important in global relationships. 
Domains like Trade, Technology, Tourism, Talent and Tradition have the power to redefine existing paradigms. 
I am thus pleased, that we established, the BRICS Business Council, in Durban, last year.
It is important, that our business leaders lead the effort in promoting trade, investment and manufacturing ties, among our countries.
I appreciate the work done by the Council.
Various enabling agreements, and MoUs; have already been signed between BRICS Development Banks, to promote intra-BRICS trade and investment. 
I would suggest the Business Council work in close coordination with the Development Banks, and, the Contact Group on Trade and Investment Issues. 
The suggestions presented in the Annual Report are important. The Council should work closely with BRICS Sherpas to see how these suggestions can be taken forward.
I am also happy to note that the Council has gone beyond BRICS to make concrete proposals for contributing to the growth, and development of the larger African region.
India remains committed to partnering with African countries in their developmental initiatives.
I once again, express my appreciation for the good work that has been done.
#DELIMITER#
15 7 2014, Brazil
BRICS Summit, Sustainable development and growth
The global economic environment remains uncertain and challenging. Recovery is still fragile despite improved prospects. 
In an environment of political conflict and persisting weakness in major economies; we have to be watchful for signs of a new bout of financial turmoil. 
Developments in Iraq and the wider region could affect this. I am also concerned that tight monetary policies in some countries couldundercut investment and growth in ours.
An open, rule-based, international trading regime is critical for global economic growth.
It must address the aspirations of the developing world. 
It must also accommodate the special needs of the most vulnerable sections of our societies, especially in areas such as food security. 
This is our broad expectation from the negotiations in the Doha Round of WTO. 
Excellencies, 
The Agreement towards setting up the BRICS New Development Bank is a significant step. I am happy, the initiative announced at the BRICS Summit in New Delhi in 2012, has become a reality. 
The agreement on the BRICS Contingent Reserve Arrangement is another major achievement. 
I compliment our Finance Ministers for concluding these two initiatives so quickly. 
These initiatives are rooted in our own experience as developing countries. 
They show our capacity to set up global institutions. 
They will open new avenues for supporting development in our countries as well as helping other developing nations. 
We should ensure these institutions establish a new model for supporting growth and stability. 
Excellencies, the theme of this Summit is also the guiding principle of my Government. For us, inclusion is a special challenge and responsibility; given our vast social, regional and economic diversity.
Our policies will focus on empowering people with skills and opportunities.
We will invest heavily in infrastructure, affordable housing, healthcare,education and clean energy.
We will harness all possibilities that advanced technologies open up.
All this will require fast-tracking of Growth. 
We will champion, clean and frugal resource use; to maintain the Sustainabilityof our development process, without constraining our growth. 
Sustainability has in fact been a core element of the Indian way of life. As Mahatma Gandhi had said, the World has enough, for everyone’s Need, but not for everyone’s Greed. We can all partake of the bounty of nature. However, exploitation of nature is a crime.
We have made progress, on the Millennium Development Goals. But widespread poverty still haunts us. 
We must keep poverty eradication at the centre of the post-2015 Development Agenda. 
It is important to shape the global discourse on the same, especially in forums like the UN. BRICS can be a major voice on the world stage to build consensus towards such efforts.
Excellencies, 
BRICS is in a position today where it wields enough horizontal influence to compel the world to take notice.
Our own good, however, lies in deepening our bonds vertically. 
We must focus on further decentralizing, this powerful forum. 
We must go beyond Summit and Leader-centric deliberations; and champion Sub-national Level exchanges. We must encourage engagement between our States, Cities and other local bodies. 
BRICS should in fact be truly driven by ‘People to People’ contact. Our Youth, in particular, must take a lead in this. 
Popularizing our languages through dedicated BRICS language schoolsin all BRICS countries could be a beginning in this direction. 
We could also consider establishing Massive Open Online Courses for making quality education accessible to all.
We could even explore the idea of a BRICS University. 
Today, technology is a transformative toolin every area of social and economic development. 
The vast pool of talent in BRICS could be combined to cooperate in areas like: health, education, agriculture, resource management and urban development. 
Perhaps a Young Scientists’ Forum of BRICS Countries could be explored.
Other initiatives could include: 
An affordable healthcare platform of BRICS nations. 
Mechanism to further cooperation, between our Small and Medium enterprises.
And, a common framework for promoting Tourism among BRICS countries.
I am aware of the comprehensive proposals that our Chinese and Russian partners have put forward to deepen BRICS cooperation. 
Our Sherpas should examine them urgently.
Let us deepen our bonds to make BRICS a stronger instrument of progress, for all mankind.
Thank you
#DELIMITER#
14 6 2014, India
Dedication of INS Vikrmaditya to country
My greetings to all my beloved fellow countrymen who have dedicated their lives protecting our great country India! I have come out of Delhi for the first time as a Prime Minister and have come directly to you. I believe this will help you understand the priorities of the new government. 
To ensure that our country supersedes the new heights set for development, to ensure that the poorest of the poor live with happiness and peace and the single most important pre-condition is that India should be safe. And for this safety the biggest driving force are the armed forces be it the Army, the Navy or the Air Force. It is the ability, sacrifice and dedication of our soldiers that ensures a peaceful sleep to the 125 crore Indians. In today’s scenario, the armed forces have undergone sea change. Modern technology has become an important component in the field of security. Hence for a nation to be equipped with the most advanced defence technologies and armaments is as important as the pooling up of dedicated, talented and courageous souls in its armed forces. Today is an important day in the history of India’s security and through our Navy that this golden chapter is being added to it. 
Vikramaditya is being dedicated to the soldiers of the Navy. A new and important step is getting imprinted in India’s security. The common man of the country would not be able to comprehend the importance of Vikramaditya as this is not his domain but to those soldiers of the Navy, who have decided to dedicate their lives for the Mother India, very well know and understand the potential of Vikramaditya. It is a matter of great pride and happiness for me that I have the opportunity of being amongst you in this historical moment when Vikramaditya is being inducted to the fleet, to be able to understand its potential and strength and also to take pride in India’s valour. 
The Navy has won accolades in many fields. In the entire history of mankind, Shivaji was the first person to float the concept of a naval force and its basic association was less with war. Its main aim was to protect the ships going for International trade and it was Shivaji’s dream that India should become a powerful country in world trade. Hence he thought of protecting the individuals involved in trade and with this the concept of a naval force came into existence centuries ago. Today, naval forces have become very important for all those countries having long coastlines or who are close to the sea. The competition in modern science and technology has also become equally important. The Navy has adopted the methodology of ‘Indigenous Technology’, the scientists from our very own India in conjunction with the inputs from Navy slowly developed ‘Indigenous Technology’ and has entered in the field of strategic warfare and in the very near future we plan to take it forward. 
We have to come out of the situation very soon when a country like India still imports defence equipments even after so many years of Independence. India has to move forward in the field of self-sufficiency in defence offset production and India should become a hub of such equipment for smaller nations of the world. The smaller nations should have faith that they have reliable defence equipment made in India by the Indian youth. We should move forward with the dream that smaller nations should be inculcated the faith that they will never accept defeat. 
The talent, innovation, research, technological upgradation capabilities of the Indian youth coupled with our strong deterrence will make us an unbeatable power and no one will dare to undermine us. The safety of the nation is associated not only with the soldiers of all the three forces but also with the temperament of the people in power. India neither wants to undermine any country’s sovereignty nor are we going to live with heads bowed down. We may be a very strong nation, but we do not intend to threaten anyone, rather we wish to move together. At the same time we are not ready to bow down and the Indian government has the capability to see anyone in the eye and make its point. And at the root cause of this courage is the preparation and courage of our soldiers and that gives us this strength. 
Today, I had the chance to see this huge development meant for our defence forces. For hours, I have been looking at this ship from every angle - from top to bottom and from right to left. I have been told that more than 1600 soldiers have been deployed on it simultaneously. Our air fleet will be able to take off and land from this ship. This is an important development from strategic point of view and today we have received an important gift. I offer my heartiest wishes to all the naval officers of the country. 
The preparation required on the coast is much more than the readiness required in the sea. Training of the citizens there is equally important for the help of the navy. A network of Naval NCC needs to be created in the coastal areas. Through the medium of Naval NCC, patriotic youth force can emerge as a powerful tool which can provide the navy with critical information and help from behind the scenes and we want to work in this direction in the near future. I would again like to give my good wishes to the soldiers of the Army, Navy and Air force on this pious occasion today. 
This new government has made some important decisions. For many years the soldiers have had a wish. I do not know why that task was not undertaken by the previous governments. May be it is my destined good fortune to do this good and holy task. And so this government has decided to create a National level War Memorial. The future generations may be reminded of those who in the post independence era laid down their lives for the country, which is why we have decided to take this step. 
One rank one pension has been a long battle, it has witnessed many ups and downs, many promises were made but the intention was never evident. This government just does not make promises, it has the intention to implement it too. We are committed to implement one rank one pension scheme. 
I again dedicate the Vikramaditya to the navy, which has sun like brightness in its name that inspires to win many a wars ahead. I wish that your life may be filled with the same brightness, valor and the conviction to be always victorious. 
Join me in saying, Bharat Mata Ki Jai!Bharat Mata Ki Jai!Bharat Mata Ki Jai!